                                   EN BANC


                       [G.R. No. 221697. March 8, 2016.]


        MARY GRACE NATIVIDAD S. POE-LLAMANZARES, petitioner,
        vs.  COMMISSION       ON    ELECTIONS     AND    ESTRELLA     C.
        ELAMPARO, respondents.


                    [G.R. Nos. 221698-700. March 8, 2016.]


        MARY GRACE NATIVIDAD S. POE-LLAMANZARES, petitioner,
        vs. COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS, FRANCISCO S. TATAD,

        ANTONIO     P.   CONTRERAS      AND    AMADO      D.   VALDEZ ,
        respondents.



                                  DECISION


  PEREZ, J p:

        Before the Court are two consolidated petitions under Rule 64 in
  relation to Rule 65 of the Rules of Court with extremely urgent application

  for an ex parte issuance of temporary restraining order/status quo ante
  order and/or writ of preliminary injunction assailing the following: (1) 1
  December 2015 Resolution of the Commission on Elections (COMELEC)
  Second Division; (2) 23 December 2015 Resolution of the COMELEC En Banc,

  in SPA No. 15-001 (DC); (3) 11 December 2015 Resolution of the COMELEC
  First Division; and (4) 23 December 2015 Resolution of the COMELEC En
  Banc, in SPA No. 15-002 (DC), SPA No. 15-007 (DC) and SPA No. 15-139 (DC)

  for having been issued without jurisdiction or with grave abuse of discretion
  amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction.

                                  The Facts
        Mary Grace Natividad S. Poe-Llamanzares (petitioner) was found

  abandoned as a newborn infant in the Parish Church of Jaro, Iloilo by a
  certain Edgardo Militar (Edgardo) on 3 September 1968. Parental care and
  custody over petitioner was passed on by Edgardo to his relatives, Emiliano
  Militar (Emiliano) and his wife. Three days after, 6 September 1968, Emiliano

  reported and registered petitioner as a foundling with the Oﬃce of the Civil
  Registrar of Iloilo City (OCR-Iloilo). In her Foundling Certiﬁcate and Certiﬁcate
  of Live Birth, the petitioner was given the name "Mary Grace Natividad
  Contreras Militar."

        When petitioner was ﬁve (5) years old, celebrity spouses Ronald Allan
  Kelley Poe (a.k.a. Fernando Poe, Jr.) and Jesusa Sonora Poe (a.k.a. Susan

  Roces) ﬁled a petition for her adoption with the Municipal Trial Court (MTC)
  of San Juan City. On 13 May 1974, the trial court granted their petition and
  ordered that petitioner's name be changed from "Mary Grace Natividad
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                      cdasiaonline.com  Contreras Militar" to "Mary Grace Natividad Sonora Poe." Although necessary

  notations were made by OCR-Iloilo on petitioner's foundling certiﬁcate
  reﬂecting the court decreed adoption,     2 the petitioner's adoptive mother
  discovered only sometime in the second half of 2005 that the lawyer who

  handled petitioner's adoption failed to secure from the OCR-Iloilo a new
  Certiﬁcate of Live Birth indicating petitioner's new name and the name of
  her adoptive parents.    3 Without delay, petitioner's mother executed an

  aﬃdavit attesting to the lawyer's omission which she submitted to the OCR-
  Iloilo. On 4 May 2006, OCR-Iloilo issued a new Certiﬁcate of Live Birth in the
  name of Mary Grace Natividad Sonora Poe.    4

        Having reached the age of eighteen (18) years in 1986, petitioner

  registered as a voter with the local COMELEC Oﬃce in San Juan City. On 13
  December 1986, she received her COMELEC Voter's Identiﬁcation Card for
  Precinct No. 196 in Greenhills, San Juan, Metro Manila.5

        On 4 April 1988, petitioner applied for and was issued Philippine
                            6
  Passport   No.  F927287     by the Department of Foreign Aﬀairs (DFA).
  Subsequently, on 5 April 1993 and 19 May 1998, she renewed her Philippine
  passport and respectively secured Philippine Passport Nos. L881511 and
              7
  DD156616.
        Initially, the petitioner enrolled and pursued a degree in Development

  Studies at the University of the Philippines 8 but she opted to continue her
  studies abroad and left for the United States of America (U.S.) in 1988.
  Petitioner graduated in 1991 from Boston College in Chestnuts Hill,

  Massachusetts where she earned her Bachelor of Arts degree in Political
  Studies. 9

        On 27 July 1991, petitioner married Teodoro Misael Daniel V.
  Llamanzares (Llamanzares), a citizen of both the Philippines and the U.S., at
                                                   10
  Sanctuario de San Jose Parish in San Juan City.    Desirous of being with her
  husband who was then based in the U.S., the couple ﬂew back to the U.S.
  two days after the wedding ceremony or on 29 July 1991.   11

        While in the U.S., the petitioner gave birth to her eldest child Brian
  Daniel (Brian) on 16 April 1992.    12 Her two daughters Hanna MacKenzie

  (Hanna) and Jesusa Anika (Anika) were both born in the Philippines on 10 July
  1998 and 5 June 2004, respectively.  13

        On 18 October 2001, petitioner became a naturalized American citizen.
  14 She obtained U.S. Passport No. 017037793 on 19 December 2001.      15

        On 8 April 2004, the petitioner came back to the Philippines together

  with Hanna to support her father's candidacy for President in the May 2004
  elections. It was during this time that she gave birth to her youngest
  daughter Anika. She returned to the U.S. with her two daughters on 8 July
         16
  2004.
        After a few months, speciﬁcally on 13 December 2004, petitioner

  rushed back to the Philippines upon learning of her father's deteriorating
  medical condition. 17 Her father slipped into a coma and eventually expired.
  The petitioner stayed in the country until 3 February 2005 to take care of

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                         cdasiaonline.com  her father's funeral arrangements as well as to assist in the settlement of his

  estate. 18

        According to the petitioner, the untimely demise of her father was a
  severe blow to her entire family. In her earnest desire to be with her grieving
  mother, the petitioner and her husband decided to move and reside
                                                                           19
  permanently in the Philippines sometime in the ﬁrst quarter of 2005.        The
  couple began preparing for their resettlement including notiﬁcation of their
  children's schools that they will be transferring to Philippine schools for the
                   20
  next semester;      coordination with property movers for the relocation of
  their household goods, furniture and cars from the U.S. to the Philippines;   21
  and inquiry with Philippine authorities as to the proper procedure to be
                                                        22
  followed in bringing their pet dog into the country.     As early as 2004, the
  petitioner already quit her job in the U.S.23

        Finally, petitioner came home to the Philippines on 24 May 2005    24 and
  without delay, secured a Tax Identiﬁcation Number from the Bureau of
                                                                     25
  Internal Revenue. Her three (3) children immediately followed         while her
  husband was forced to stay in the U.S. to complete pending projects as well
  as to arrange the sale of their family home there.  26

        The petitioner and her children brieﬂy stayed at her mother's place
  until she and her husband purchased a condominium unit with a parking slot

  at One Wilson Place Condominium in San Juan City in the second half of
  2005.  27 The corresponding Condominium Certiﬁcates of Title covering the
  unit and parking slot were issued by the Register of Deeds of San Juan City

  to petitioner and her husband on 20 February 2006.          28 Meanwhile, her
  children of school age began attending Philippine private schools.

        On 14 February 2006, the petitioner made a quick trip to the U.S. to
  supervise the disposal of some of the family's remaining household
               29                                                          30
  belongings.     She travelled back to the Philippines on 11 March 2006.
        In late March 2006, petitioner's husband oﬃcially informed the U.S.

  Postal Service of the family's change and abandonment of their address in
  the   U.S. 31 The family home was eventually sold on 27 April 2006.           32
  Petitioner's husband resigned from his job in the U.S. in April 2006, arrived in

  the country on 4 May 2006 and started working for a major Philippine
  company in July 2006.   33

        In early 2006, petitioner and her husband acquired a 509-square meter
  lot in Corinthian Hills, Quezon City where they built their family home  34 and

  to this day, is where the couple and their children have been residing.    35 A
  Transfer Certiﬁcate of Title covering said property was issued in the couple's
  name by the Register of Deeds of Quezon City on 1 June 2006.

        On 7 July 2006, petitioner took her Oath of Allegiance to the Republic

  of the Philippines pursuant to Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9225 or the Citizenship
  Retention and Re-acquisition Act of 2003.    36 Under the same Act, she ﬁled
  with the Bureau of Immigration (BI) a sworn petition to reacquire Philippine

  citizenship together with petitions for derivative citizenship on behalf of her
  three minor children on 10 July 2006.   37 As can be gathered from its 18 July
  2006 Order, the BI acted favorably on petitioner's petitions and declared that
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                           cdasiaonline.com  she is deemed to have reacquired her Philippine citizenship while her

  children are considered as citizens of the Philippines.38 Consequently, the BI
  issued Identiﬁcation Certiﬁcates (ICs) in petitioner's name and in the names
  of her three (3) children.39

        Again, petitioner registered as a voter ofBarangay Santa Lucia, San
                                    40
  Juan City on 31 August 2006.         She also secured from the DFA a new
  Philippine Passport bearing the No. XX4731999.         41  This passport was
  renewed on 18 March 2014 and she was issued Philippine Passport No.
                           42
  EC0588861 by the DFA.
        On 6 October 2010, President Benigno S. Aquino III appointed petitioner

  as Chairperson of the Movie and Television Review and Classiﬁcation Board
  (MTRCB).   43 Before assuming her post, petitioner executed an "Aﬃdavit of
  Renunciation of Allegiance to the United States of America and Renunciation

  of American Citizenship" before a notary public in Pasig City on 20 October
  2010,  44 in satisfaction of the legal requisites stated in Section 5 of R.A. No.
         45
  9225.     The following day, 21 October 2010 petitioner submitted the said
  affidavit to the BI46and took her oath of office as Chairperson of the MTRCB.
  47 From then on, petitioner stopped using her American passport.   48

        On 12 July 2011, the petitioner executed before the Vice Consul of the
  U.S. Embassy in Manila an "Oath/Aﬃrmation of Renunciation of Nationality

  of   the  United   States." 49  On that day, she accomplished a sworn
  questionnaire before the U.S. Vice Consul wherein she stated that she had
  taken her oath as MTRCB Chairperson on 21 October 2010 with the intent,

  among others, of relinquishing her American citizenship.      50  In the same
  questionnaire, the petitioner stated that she had resided outside of the U.S.,
  speciﬁcally in the Philippines, from 3 September 1968 to 29 July 1991 and

  from May 2005 to present.   51

        On 9 December 2011, the U.S. Vice Consul issued to petitioner a
  "Certiﬁcate of Loss of Nationality of the United States" eﬀective 21 October
  2010.  52

        On 2 October 2012, the petitioner ﬁled with the COMELEC her
  Certiﬁcate of Candidacy (COC) for Senator for the 2013 Elections wherein

  she answered "6 years and 6 months" to the question "Period of residence in
  the Philippines before May 13, 2013."     53  Petitioner obtained the highest
                                                                   54
  number of votes and was proclaimed Senator on 16 May 2013.
        On 19 December 2013, petitioner obtained Philippine Diplomatic

  Passport No. DE0004530.    55

        On 15 October 2015, petitioner ﬁled her COC for the Presidency for the
  May 2016 Elections.    56 In her COC, the petitioner declared that she is a
  natural-born citizen and that her residence in the Philippines up to the day

  before 9 May 2016 would be ten (10) years and eleven (11) months counted
  from 24 May 2005.      57 The petitioner attached to her COC an "Aﬃdavit
  Aﬃrming Renunciation of U.S.A. Citizenship" subscribed and sworn to before
                                                       58
  a notary public in Quezon City on 14 October 2015.
        Petitioner's ﬁling of her COC for President in the upcoming elections

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                          cdasiaonline.com  triggered the ﬁling of several COMELEC cases against her which were the

  subject of these consolidated cases.
  Origin of Petition for Certiorari in G.R. No. 221697

        A day after petitioner ﬁled her COC for President, Estrella Elamparo

  (Elamparo) ﬁled a petition to deny due course or cancel said COC which was
  docketed as SPA No. 15-001 (DC) and raﬄed to the COMELEC Second
  Division. 59  She is convinced that the COMELEC has jurisdiction over her
            60
  petition.    Essentially, Elamparo's contention is that petitioner committed
  material misrepresentation when she stated in her COC that she is a natural-
  born Filipino citizen and that she is a resident of the Philippines for at least

  ten (10) years and eleven (11) months up to the day before the 9 May 2016
  Elections. 61

        On the issue of citizenship, Elamparo argued that petitioner cannot be
  considered as a natural-born Filipino on account of the fact that she was a
  foundling.  62  Elamparo claimed that international law does not confer
                                                                 63
  natural-born status and Filipino citizenship on foundlings.       Following this
  line of reasoning, petitioner is not qualiﬁed to apply for reacquisition of
  Filipino citizenship under R.A. No. 9225 for she is not a natural-born Filipino
                           64
  citizen to begin with.       Even assuming arguendo that petitioner was a
  natural-born Filipino, she is deemed to have lost that status when she
  became a naturalized American citizen.     65  According to Elamparo, natural-
                                                    66
  born citizenship must be continuous from birth.
        On the matter of petitioner's residency, Elamparo pointed out that

  petitioner was bound by the sworn declaration she made in her 2012 COC
  for Senator wherein she indicated that she had resided in the country for
  only six (6) years and six (6) months as of May 2013 Elections. Elamparo

  likewise insisted that assuming arguendo that petitioner is qualiﬁed to regain
  her natural-born status under R.A. No. 9225, she still fell short of the ten-
  year residency requirement of the Constitution as her residence could only

  be counted at the earliest from July 2006, when she reacquired Philippine
  citizenship under the said Act. Also on the assumption that petitioner is
  qualiﬁed to reacquire lost Philippine Citizenship, Elamparo is of the belief
                                                                 67
  that she failed to reestablish her domicile in the Philippines.
        Petitioner seasonably filed her Answer wherein she countered that:

        (1) the COMELEC did not have jurisdiction over Elamparo's petition as it
              was actually a petition for quo warranto which could only be ﬁled

              if Grace Poe wins in the Presidential elections, and that the
              Department of Justice (DOJ) has primary jurisdiction to revoke the
              BI's July 18, 2006 Order;

        (2) the petition failed to state a cause of action because it did not
              contain allegations which, if hypothetically admitted, would
              make false the statement in her COC that she is a natural-born
              Filipino citizen nor was there any allegation that there was a
              willful or deliberate intent to misrepresent on her part;

        (3) she did not make any material misrepresentation in the COC
              regarding her citizenship and residency qualifications for:

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                            cdasiaonline.com                    a. the 1934 Constitutional Convention deliberations
              show that foundlings were considered citizens;

                    b. foundlings are presumed under international law
              to have been born of citizens of the place where they are

              found;
                    c.  she   reacquired  her   natural-born  Philippine
              citizenship under the provisions of R.A. No. 9225;

                    d. she executed a sworn renunciation of her
              American citizenship prior to the ﬁling of her COC for

              President in the May 9, 2016 Elections and that the same
              is in full force and eﬀect and has not been withdrawn or
              recanted;

                    e. the burden was on Elamparo in proving that she
              did not possess natural-born status;

                    f. residence is a matter of evidence and that she
              reestablished her domicile in the Philippines as early as
              May 24, 2005;

                    g. she could reestablish residence even before she
              reacquired natural-born citizenship under R.A. No. 9225;

                    h. statement regarding the period of residence in
              her 2012 COC for Senator was an honest mistake, not
              binding and should give way to evidence on her true date
              of reacquisition of domicile;

                    i. Elamparo's petition is merely an action to usurp
              the sovereign right of the Filipino people to decide a
              purely political question, that is, should she serve as the
              country's next leader.68

        After the parties submitted their respective Memoranda, the petition
  was deemed submitted for resolution.

        On 1 December 2015, the COMELEC Second Division promulgated a

  Resolution ﬁnding that petitioner's COC, ﬁled for the purpose of running for
  the President of the Republic of the Philippines in the 9 May 2016 National
  and Local Elections, contained material representations which are false. The

  fallo of the aforesaid Resolution reads:
              WHEREFORE, in view of all the foregoing considerations, the

        instant Petition to Deny Due Course to or Cancel Certiﬁcate of
        Candidacy    is  hereby GRANTED. Accordingly, the Certiﬁcate of
        Candidacy for President of the Republic of the Philippines in the May
        9, 2016 National and Local Elections ﬁled by respondent Mary Grace
        Natividad Sonora Poe Llamanzares is hereby CANCELLED.      69

        Motion for Reconsideration of the 1 December 2015 Resolution was
  ﬁled by petitioner which the COMELEC En Banc resolved in its 23 December

  2015 Resolution by denying the same.     70

  Origin of Petition for Certiorari in G.R. Nos. 221698-700
        This case stemmed from three (3) separate petitions ﬁled by Francisco

  S. Tatad (Tatad), Antonio P. Contreras (Contreras) and Amado D. Valdez
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                             cdasiaonline.com  (Valdez) against petitioner before the COMELEC which were consolidated and

  raffled to its First Division.
        In his petition to disqualify petitioner under Rule 25 of the COMELEC

  Rules of Procedure,  71 docketed as SPA No. 15-002 (DC), Tatad alleged that
  petitioner lacks the requisite residency and citizenship to qualify her for the
  Presidency.  72

        Tatad theorized that since the Philippines adheres to the principle of

  jus sanguinis, persons of unknown parentage, particularly foundlings, cannot
  be considered natural-born Filipino citizens since blood relationship is
  determinative of natural-born status.   73 Tatad invoked the rule of statutory

  construction that what is not included is excluded. He averred that the fact
  that foundlings were not expressly included in the categories of citizens in
  the 1935 Constitution is indicative of the framers' intent to exclude them.   74

  Therefore, the burden lies on petitioner to prove that she is a natural-born
  citizen.75

        Neither can petitioner seek refuge under international conventions or
  treaties to support her claim that foundlings have a nationality.  76According
  to Tatad, international conventions and treaties are not self-executory and

  that local legislations are necessary in order to give eﬀect to treaty
  obligations assumed by the Philippines.   77 He also stressed that there is no
  standard state practice that automatically confers natural-born status to
              78
  foundlings.
        Similar to Elamparo's argument, Tatad claimed that petitioner cannot

  avail of the option to reacquire Philippine citizenship under R.A. No. 9225
  because it only applies to former natural-born citizens and petitioner was not
  as she was a foundling.  79

        Referring to petitioner's COC for Senator, Tatad concluded that she did
                                                                 80
  not comply with the ten (10)-year residency requirement.          Tatad opined
  that petitioner acquired her domicile in Quezon City only from the time she
  renounced her American citizenship which was sometime in 2010 or 2011.        81
  Additionally, Tatad questioned petitioner's lack of intention to abandon her

  U.S. domicile as evinced by the fact that her husband stayed thereat and her
  frequent trips to the U.S.82

        In support of his petition to deny due course or cancel the COC of
  petitioner, docketed as SPA No. 15-139 (DC), Valdez alleged that her

  repatriation under R.A. No. 9225 did not bestow upon her the status of a
  natural-born   citizen.83  He advanced the view that former natural-born
  citizens who are repatriated under the said Act reacquires only their

  Philippine citizenship and will not revert to their original status as natural-
  born citizens. 84

        He further argued that petitioner's own admission in her COC for
  Senator that she had only been a resident of the Philippines for at least six
  (6) years and six (6) months prior to the 13 May 2013 Elections operates

  against her. Valdez rejected petitioner's claim that she could have validly
  reestablished her domicile in the Philippines prior to her reacquisition of
  Philippine citizenship. In eﬀect, his position was that petitioner did not meet
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                           cdasiaonline.com  the ten (10)-year residency requirement for President.

        Unlike the previous COMELEC cases ﬁled against petitioner, Contreras'
  petition, 85 docketed as SPA No. 15-007 (DC), limited the attack to the

  residency issue. He claimed that petitioner's 2015 COC for President should
  be cancelled on the ground that she did not possess the ten-year period of
  residency required for said candidacy and that she made false entry in her

  COC when she stated that she is a legal resident of the Philippines for ten
  (10) years and eleven (11) months by 9 May 2016.       86 Contreras contended
  that the reckoning period for computing petitioner's residency in the

  Philippines should be from 18 July 2006, the date when her petition to
  reacquire Philippine citizenship was approved by the BI.   87 He asserted that
  petitioner's physical presence in the country before 18 July 2006 could not

  be valid evidence of reacquisition of her Philippine domicile since she was
  then living here as an American citizen and as such, she was governed by
  the Philippine immigration laws.  88

        In her defense, petitioner raised the following arguments:

        First, Tatad's petition should be dismissed outright for failure to state a
  cause of action. His petition did not invoke grounds proper for a

  disqualiﬁcation case as enumerated under Sections 12 and 68 of the
  Omnibus Election Code.    89 Instead, Tatad completely relied on the alleged
  lack of residency and natural-born status of petitioner which are not among

  the recognized grounds for the disqualiﬁcation of a candidate to an elective
  office.90

        Second, the petitions ﬁled against her are basically petitions forquo
  warranto as they focus on establishing her ineligibility for the Presidency.  91
  A petition for quo warranto falls within the exclusive jurisdiction of the

  Presidential Electoral Tribunal (PET) and not the COMELEC.   92

        Third, the burden to prove that she is not a natural-born Filipino citizen
  is on the respondents.   93 Otherwise stated, she has a presumption in her
  favor that she is a natural-born citizen of this country.

        Fourth, customary international law dictates that foundlings are
  entitled to a nationality and are presumed to be citizens of the country
                           94
  where they are found.        Consequently, the petitioner is considered as a
  natural-born citizen of the Philippines.95

        Fifth, she claimed that as a natural-born citizen, she has every right to
  be repatriated under R.A. No. 9225 or the right to reacquire her natural-born
  status. 96 Moreover, the oﬃcial acts of the Philippine Government enjoy the

  presumption of regularity, to wit: the issuance of the 18 July 2006 Order of
  the BI declaring her as natural-born citizen, her appointment as MTRCB Chair
  and the issuance of the decree of adoption of San Juan RTC.     97She believed

  that all these acts reinforced her position that she is a natural-born citizen of
  the Philippines. 98

        Sixth, she maintained that as early as the ﬁrst quarter of 2005, she
  started   reestablishing  her   domicile  of  choice   in  the  Philippines  as

  demonstrated by her children's resettlement and schooling in the country,
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                           cdasiaonline.com  purchase of a condominium unit in San Juan City and the construction of
                                        99
  their family home in Corinthian Hills.
        Seventh, she insisted that she could legally reestablish her domicile of

  choice in the Philippines even before she renounced her American citizenship
  as long as the three determinants for a change of domicile are complied
  with. 100 She reasoned out that there was no requirement that renunciation

  of foreign citizenship is a prerequisite for the acquisition of a new domicile of
  choice. 101

        Eighth, she reiterated that the period appearing in the residency
  portion of her COC for Senator was a mistake made in good faith.  102

        In a Resolution 103 promulgated on 11 December 2015, the COMELEC
  First Division ruled that petitioner is not a natural-born citizen, that she failed
  to complete the ten (10)-year residency requirement, and that she

  committed material misrepresentation in her COC when she declared therein
  that she has been a resident of the Philippines for a period of ten (10) years
  and eleven (11) months as of the day of the elections on 9 May 2016. The

  COMELEC First Division concluded that she is not qualiﬁed for the elective
  position of President of the Republic of the Philippines. The dispositive
  portion of said Resolution reads:

              WHEREFORE,       premises   considered,    the   Commission
        RESOLVED, as it hereby RESOLVES, to GRANT the Petitions and
        cancel the Certiﬁcate of Candidacy of MARY GRACE NATIVIDAD
        SONORA POE-LLAMANZARES for the elective position of President

        of the Republic of the Philippines in connection with the 9 May 2016
        Synchronized Local and National Elections.

        Petitioner ﬁled a motion for reconsideration seeking a reversal of the
  COMELEC First Division's Resolution. On 23 December 2015, the COMELEC
  En Banc issued a Resolution denying petitioner's motion for reconsideration.

        Alarmed by the adverse rulings of the COMELEC, petitioner instituted
  the present petitions for certiorari with urgent prayer for the issuance of an

  ex parte temporary restraining order/status quo ante order and/or writ of
  preliminary injunction. On 28 December 2015, temporary restraining orders
  were issued by the Court enjoining the COMELEC and its representatives
  from implementing the assailed COMELEC Resolutions until further orders

  from the Court. The Court also ordered the consolidation of the two petitions
  ﬁled by petitioner in its Resolution of 12 January 2016. Thereafter, oral
  arguments were held in these cases.

        The Court GRANTS the petition of Mary Grace Natividad S. Poe-

  Llamanzares and to ANNUL and SET ASIDE the:
        1. Resolution dated 1 December 2015 rendered through its Second

              Division, in SPA No. 15-001 (DC), entitled Estrella C. Elamparo,
              petitioner, vs. Mary Grace Natividad Sonora Poe-Llamanzares.

        2. Resolution dated 11 December 2015, rendered through its First
              Division, in the consolidated cases SPA No. 15-002 (DC) entitled
              Francisco S. Tatad, petitioner, vs. Mary Grace Natividad Sonora

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                         cdasiaonline.com              Poe-Llamanzares, respondent; SPA No. 15-007 (DC) entitled

              Antonio P. Contreras, petitioner, vs. Mary Grace Natividad Sonora
              Poe-Llamanzares, respondent; and SPA No. 15-139 (DC) entitled
              Amado D. Valdez, petitioner, v. Mary Grace Natividad Sonora Poe-
              Llamanzares, respondent.

        3. Resolution dated 23 December 2015 of the Commission En Banc,
              upholding the 1 December 2015 Resolution of the Second

              Division.
        4. Resolution dated 23 December 2015 of the Commission En Banc,

              upholding the 11 December 2015 Resolution of the First Division.

        The procedure and the conclusions from which the questioned
  Resolutions emanated are tainted with grave abuse of discretion amounting
  to lack of jurisdiction. The petitioner is a QUALIFIED CANDIDATE for President
  in the 9 May 2016 National Elections.

        The issue before the COMELEC is whether or not the COC of petitioner
  should be denied due course or cancelled "on the exclusive ground" that she

  made in the certiﬁcate a false material representation. The exclusivity of the
  ground should hedge in the discretion of the COMELEC and restrain it from
  going into the issue of the qualiﬁcations of the candidate for the position, if,

  as in this case, such issue is yet undecided or undetermined by the proper
  authority. The COMELEC cannot itself, in the same cancellation case, decide
  the qualification or lack thereof of the candidate.

        We rely, ﬁrst of all, on the Constitution of our Republic, particularly its
  provisions in Article IX, C, Section 2:

              Section   2. The Commission on Elections shall exercise the
        following powers and functions:

              (1) Enforce and administer all laws and regulations relative to the
                    conduct of an election, plebiscite, initiative, referendum,
                    and recall.

              (2) Exercise exclusive original jurisdiction over all contests
                    relating to the elections, returns, and qualiﬁcations of all
                    elective  regional,  provincial,  and   city  oﬃcials,  and
                    appellate jurisdiction over all contests involving elective
                    municipal oﬃcials decided by trial courts of general
                    jurisdiction, or involving elective barangay oﬃcials decided

                    by trial courts of limited jurisdiction.
              Decisions, ﬁnal orders, or rulings of the Commission on elections
                    contests involving elective municipal and barangay oﬃces
                    shall be final, executory, and not appealable.

              (3) Decide, except those involving the right to vote, all questions
                    aﬀecting elections, including determination of the number
                    and location of polling places, appointment of election
                    officials and inspectors, and registration of voters.

              (4) Deputize, with the concurrence of the President, law
                    enforcement    agencies    and   instrumentalities  of   the
                    Government, including the Armed Forces of the Philippines,
                    for the exclusive purpose of ensuring free, orderly, honest,
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                             cdasiaonline.com                     peaceful, and credible elections.

               (5)  Register,  after  suﬃcient   publication,  political parties,
                     organizations, or coalitions which, in addition to other
                     requirements, must present their platform or program of
                     government; and accredit citizens' arms of the Commission

                     on Elections. Religious denominations and sects shall not
                     be registered. Those which seek to achieve their goals
                     through violence or unlawful means, or refuse to uphold
                     and adhere to this Constitution, or which are supported by
                     any   foreign  government     shall  likewise  be   refused

                     registration.
               Financial contributions from foreign governments and their
                     agencies to political parties, organizations, coalitions, or

                     candidates related to elections constitute interference in
                     national aﬀairs, and, when accepted, shall be an additional
                     ground for the cancellation of their registration with the
                     Commission, in addition to other penalties that may be
                     prescribed by law.

               (6) File, upon a veriﬁed complaint, or on its own initiative,
                     petitions in court for inclusion or exclusion of voters;
                     investigate and, where appropriate, prosecute cases of

                     violations of election laws, including acts or omissions
                     constituting election frauds, offenses, and malpractices.
               (7) Recommend to the Congress eﬀective measures to minimize
                     election spending, including limitation of places where

                     propaganda materials shall be posted, and to prevent and
                     penalize   all  forms    of   election   frauds,   oﬀenses,
                     malpractices, and nuisance candidacies.

               (8) Recommend to the President the removal of any oﬃcer or
                     employee it has deputized, or the imposition of any other
                     disciplinary action,  for  violation or  disregard   of,  or
                     disobedience to its directive, order, or decision.

               (9) Submit to the President and the Congress a comprehensive
                     report on the conduct of each election, plebiscite, initiative,
                     referendum, or recall.

         Not any one of the enumerated powers approximate the exactitude of
   the provisions of Article VI, Section 17 of the same basic law stating that:

               The Senate and the House of Representatives shall each have
         an Electoral Tribunal which shall be the sole judge of all contests
         relating to the election, returns, and qualiﬁcations of their respective

         Members. Each Electoral Tribunal shall be composed of nine
         Members, three of whom shall be Justices of the Supreme Court to be
         designated by the Chief Justice, and the remaining six shall be
         Members of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case
         may be, who shall be chosen on the basis of proportional

         representation  from   the   political parties  and   the  parties  or
         organizations registered under the party-list system represented
         therein. The senior Justice in the Electoral Tribunal shall be its
         Chairman.

   or of the last paragraph of Article VII, Section 4 which provides that:
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                              cdasiaonline.com              The Supreme Court, sitting en banc, shall be the sole judge of
        all contests relating to the election, returns, and qualiﬁcations of the

        President or Vice-President, and may promulgate its rules for the
        purpose.

        The tribunals which have jurisdiction over the question of the
  qualifications of the President, the Vice-President, Senators and the Members
  of the House of Representatives was made clear by the Constitution. There is

  no such provision for candidates for these positions.
        Can the COMELEC be such judge?

        The opinion of Justice Vicente V. Mendoza in Romualdez-Marcos v.
                               104
  Commission on Elections,         which was aﬃrmatively cited in theEn Banc
  decision in Fermin v. COMELEC     105is our guide. The citation in Fermin reads:

              Apparently realizing the lack of an authorized proceeding for
        declaring the ineligibility of candidates, the COMELEC amended its
        rules on February 15, 1993 so as to provide in Rule 25 §1, the
        following:

                    Grounds for disqualiﬁcation. — Any candidate who
              does not possess all the qualiﬁcations of a candidate as
              provided for by the Constitution or by existing law or who

              commits any act declared by law to be grounds for
              disqualiﬁcation may be disqualiﬁed from continuing as a
              candidate.

              The lack of provision for declaring the ineligibility of candidates,
        however, cannot be supplied by a mere rule. Such an act is
        equivalent to the creation of a cause of action which is a substantive
        matter which the COMELEC, in the exercise of its rule-making power
        under Art. IX, A, §6 of the Constitution, cannot do it. It is noteworthy

        that the Constitution withholds from the COMELEC even the power to
        decide cases involving the right to vote, which essentially involves an
        inquiry into qualifications based on age, residence and citizenship of
        voters. [Art. IX, C, §2(3)]

              The assimilation in Rule 25 of the COMELEC rules of grounds for
        ineligibility into grounds for disqualiﬁcation is contrary to the evident
        intention of the law. For not only in their grounds but also in their
        consequences are proceedings for "disqualiﬁcation" diﬀerent from

        those for a declaration of "ineligibility." "Disqualification" proceedings,
        as already stated, are based on grounds speciﬁed in §12 and §68 of
        the Omnibus Election Code and in §40 of the Local Government Code
        and are for the purpose of barring an individual from becoming a
        candidate or from continuing as a candidate for public oﬃce. In a

        word, their purpose is to eliminate a candidate from the race either
        from the start or during its progress. "Ineligibility," on the other hand,
        refers to the lack of the qualifications prescribed in the Constitution or
        the   statutes  for holding  public  oﬃce and the purpose of the
        proceedings for declaration of ineligibility is to remove the incumbent

        from office.
              Consequently, that an individual possesses the qualiﬁcations

        for a public oﬃce does not imply that he is not disqualiﬁed from
        becoming a candidate or continuing as a candidate for a public oﬃce
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                             cdasiaonline.com        and vice versa. We have this sort of dichotomy in our Naturalization
        Law. (C.A. No. 473) That an alien has the qualiﬁcations prescribed in

        §2 of the Law does not imply that he does not suﬀer from any of [the]
        disqualifications provided in §4.

        Before we get derailed by the distinction as to grounds and the
  consequences of the respective proceedings, the importance of the opinion
  is in its statement that "the lack of provision for declaring the ineligibility of

  candidates, however, cannot be supplied by a mere rule". Justice Mendoza
  lectured in Romualdez-Marcos that:

              Three reasons may be cited to explain the absence of an
        authorized    proceeding     for   determining before   election   the
        qualifications of a candidate.

              First is the fact that unless a candidate wins and is proclaimed
        elected, there is no necessity for determining his eligibility for the
        oﬃce. In contrast, whether an individual should be disqualiﬁed as a
        candidate for acts constituting election oﬀenses (e.g., vote buying,

        over spending, commission of prohibited acts) is a prejudicial
        question which should be determined lest he wins because of the
        very acts for which his disqualiﬁcation is being sought. That is why it
        is provided that if the grounds for disqualiﬁcation are established, a
        candidate will not be voted for; if he has been voted for, the votes in

        his favor will not be counted; and if for some reason he has been
        voted for and he has won, either he will not be proclaimed or his
        proclamation will be set aside.

              Second is the fact that the determination of a candidates'
        eligibility, e.g., his citizenship or, as in this case, his domicile, may
        take a long time to make, extending beyond the beginning of the
        term of the oﬃce. This is amply demonstrated in the companion case
        (G.R.  No.   120265, Agapito A. Aquino v. COMELEC) where the

        determination of Aquino's residence was still pending in the COMELEC
        even after the elections of May 8, 1995. This is contrary to the
        summary character proceedings relating to certiﬁcates of candidacy.
        That is why the law makes the receipt of certiﬁcates of candidacy a
        ministerial duty of the COMELEC and its oﬃcers. The law is satisﬁed if

        candidates state in their certiﬁcates of candidacy that they are
        eligible for the position which they seek to ﬁll, leaving the
        determination of their qualiﬁcations to be made after the election and
        only in the event they are elected. Only in cases involving charges of
        false representations made in certiﬁcates of candidacy is the

        COMELEC given jurisdiction.
              Third is the policy underlying the prohibition against pre-
        proclamation cases in elections for President, Vice President,

        Senators and members of the House of Representatives. (R.A. No.
        7166, § 15) The purpose is to preserve the prerogatives of the House
        of Representatives Electoral Tribunal and the other Tribunals as "sole
        judges"   under   the   Constitution  of   the election, returns   and
        qualifications of members of Congress of the President and Vice
                                        106
        President, as the case may be.
        To be sure, the authoritativeness of the Romualdez pronouncements as

  reiterated in Fermin, led to the amendment through COMELEC Resolution
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                             cdasiaonline.com  No. 9523, on 25 September 2012 of its Rule 25. This, the 15 February 1993

  version of Rule 25, which states that:
        Grounds for disqualiﬁcation. — Any candidate who does not possess
        all the qualiﬁcations of a candidate as provided for by the

        Constitution or by existing law or who commits any act declared by
        law to be grounds for disqualiﬁcation may be disqualiﬁed from
        continuing as a candidate.107

  was in the 2012 rendition, drastically changed to:
        Grounds. — Any candidate who, in action or protest in which he is a
        party, is declared by ﬁnal decision of a competent court, guilty of, or

        found by the Commission to be suﬀering from any disqualiﬁcation
        provided by law or the Constitution.
        A Petition to Disqualify a Candidate invoking grounds for a Petition to

        Deny to or Cancel a Certiﬁcate of Candidacy or Petition to Declare a
        Candidate as a Nuisance Candidate, or a combination thereof, shall
        be summarily dismissed.

        Clearly, the amendment done in 2012 is an acceptance of the reality of
  absence of an authorized proceeding for determining before election the
  qualiﬁcations of candidate. Such that, as presently required, to disqualify a
  candidate there must be a declaration by a ﬁnal judgment of a competent

  court that the candidate sought to be disqualiﬁed "is guilty of or found by
  the Commission to be suﬀering from any disqualiﬁcation provided by law or
  the Constitution."

        Insofar as the qualiﬁcation of a candidate is concerned, Rule 25 and
  Rule 23 are ﬂipsides of one to the other. Both do not allow, are not

  authorizations, are not vestment of jurisdiction, for the COMELEC to
  determine the qualiﬁcation of a candidate. The facts of qualiﬁcation must
  beforehand be established in a prior proceeding before an authority properly

  vested with jurisdiction. The prior determination of qualiﬁcation may be by
  statute, by executive order or by a judgment of a competent court or
  tribunal.

        If a candidate cannot be disqualiﬁed without a prior ﬁnding that he or
  she is suﬀering from a disqualiﬁcation "provided by law or the Constitution,"
  neither can the certificate of candidacy be cancelled or denied due course on

  grounds of false representations regarding his or her qualiﬁcations, without
  a prior authoritative ﬁnding that he or she is not qualiﬁed, such prior
  authority being the necessary measure by which the falsity of the

  representation can be found. The only exception that can be conceded are
  self-evident facts of unquestioned or unquestionable veracity and judicial
  confessions. Such are, anyway, bases equivalent to prior decisions against
  which the falsity of representation can be determined.

        The need for a predicate ﬁnding or ﬁnal pronouncement in a
  proceeding under Rule 23 that deals with, as in this case, alleged false

  representations regarding the candidate's citizenship and residence, forced
  the COMELEC to rule essentially that since foundlings    108are not mentioned
  in the enumeration of citizens under the 1935 Constitution,      109 they then

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                           cdasiaonline.com  cannot be citizens. As the COMELEC stated in oral arguments, when

  petitioner admitted that she is a foundling, she said it all. This borders on
  bigotry. Oddly, in an eﬀort at tolerance, the COMELEC, after saying that it
  cannot rule that herein petitioner possesses blood relationship with a Filipino
  citizen when "it is certain that such relationship is indemonstrable,"

  proceeded to say that "she now has the burden to present evidence to prove
  her natural filiation with a Filipino parent."

        The fact is that petitioner's blood relationship with a Filipino citizen is
  DEMONSTRABLE.

        At the outset, it must be noted that presumptions regarding paternity
  is neither unknown nor unaccepted in Philippine Law. The Family Code of the
  Philippines has a whole chapter on Paternity and Filiation.     110 That said,

  there is more than sufficient evidence that petitioner has Filipino parents and
  is therefore a natural-born Filipino. Parenthetically, the burden of proof was
  on private respondents to show that petitioner is not a Filipino citizen. The
  private respondents should have shown that both of petitioner's parents

  were aliens. Her admission that she is a foundling did not shift the burden to
  her because such status did not exclude the possibility that her parents were
  Filipinos, especially as in this case where there is a high probability, if not

  certainty, that her parents are Filipinos.



        The factual issue is not who the parents of petitioner are, as their
  identities are unknown, but whether such parents are Filipinos. Under
  Section 4, Rule 128:

              Sec. 4. Relevancy, collateral matters — Evidence must have
        such a relation to the fact in issue as to induce belief in its existence
        or non-existence. Evidence on collateral matters shall not be allowed,
        except when it tends in any reasonable degree to establish the
        probability of improbability of the fact in issue.

        The Solicitor General oﬀered oﬃcial statistics from the Philippine
  Statistics Authority (PSA) 111 that from 1965 to 1975, the total number of

  foreigners born in the Philippines was 15,986 while the total number of
  Filipinos born in the country was 10,558,278. The statistical probability that
  any child born in the Philippines in that decade is natural-born Filipino was

  99.83%. For her part, petitioner presented census statistics for Iloilo
  Province for 1960 and 1970, also from the PSA. In 1960, there were 962,532
  Filipinos and 4,734 foreigners in the province; 99.62% of the population
  were Filipinos. In 1970, the ﬁgures were 1,162,669 Filipinos and 5,304

  foreigners, or 99.55%. Also presented were ﬁgures for the child producing
  ages (15-49). In 1960, there were 230,528 female Filipinos as against 730
  female foreigners or 99.68%. In the same year, there were 210,349 Filipino

  males and 886 male aliens, or 99.58%. In 1970, there were 270,299 Filipino
  females versus 1,190 female aliens, or 99.56%. That same year, there were
  245,740 Filipino males as against only 1,165 male aliens or 99.53%.
  COMELEC did not dispute these ﬁgures. Notably, Commissioner Arthur Lim

  admitted, during the oral arguments, that at the time petitioner was found in
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                          cdasiaonline.com   1968, the majority of the population in Iloilo was Filipino. 112

         Other circumstantial evidence of the nationality of petitioner's parents
   are the fact that she was abandoned as an infant in a Roman Catholic

   Church in Iloilo City. She also has typical Filipino features: height, ﬂat nasal
   bridge, straight black hair, almond shaped eyes and an oval face.

         There is a disputable presumption that things have happened
   according to the ordinary course of nature and the ordinary habits of life.    113

   All of the foregoing evidence, that a person with typical Filipino features is
   abandoned in Catholic Church in a municipality where the population of the
   Philippines is overwhelmingly Filipinos such that there would be more than a

   99% chance that a child born in the province would be a Filipino, would
   indicate more than ample probability if not statistical certainty, that
   petitioner's parents are Filipinos. That probability and the evidence on which

   it is based are admissible under Rule 128, Section 4 of the Revised Rules on
   Evidence.

         To assume otherwise is to accept the absurd, if not the virtually
   impossible, as the norm. In the words of the Solicitor General:

               Second. It is contrary to common sense because foreigners do
         not come to the Philippines so they can get pregnant and leave their
         newborn babies behind. We do not face a situation where the
         probability is such that every foundling would have a 50% chance of

         being a Filipino and a 50% chance of being a foreigner. We need to
         frame our questions properly. What are the chances that the parents
         of anyone born in the Philippines would be foreigners? Almost zero.
         What are the chances that the parents of anyone born in the
         Philippines would be Filipinos? 99.9%.

               According to the Philippine Statistics Authority, from 2010 to
         2014, on a yearly average, there were 1,766,046 children born in the
         Philippines to Filipino parents, as opposed to 1,301 children in the

         Philippines of foreign parents. Thus, for that sample period, the ratio
         of non-Filipino children to natural born Filipino children is 1:1357. This
         means that the statistical probability that any child born in the
         Philippines would be a natural born Filipino is 99.93%.

               From 1965 to 1975, the total number of foreigners born in the
         Philippines is 15,986 while the total number of Filipinos born in the
         Philippines is 15,558,278. For this period, the ratio of non-Filipino
         children is 1:661. This means that the statistical probability that any

         child born in the Philippines on that decade would be a natural born
         Filipino is 99.83%.

               We can invite statisticians and social anthropologists to crunch
         the numbers for us, but I am conﬁdent that the statistical probability
         that a child born in the Philippines would be a natural born Filipino will
         not be aﬀected by whether or not the parents are known. If at all, the
         likelihood that a foundling would have a Filipino parent might even be

         higher than 99.9%. Filipinos abandon their children out of poverty or
         perhaps, shame. We do not imagine foreigners abandoning their
         children here in the Philippines thinking those infants would have
         better economic opportunities or believing that this country is a
         tropical paradise suitable for raising abandoned children. I certainly
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                              cdasiaonline.com         doubt whether a foreign couple has ever considered their child
         excess baggage that is best left behind.

               To deny full Filipino citizenship to all foundlings and render
         them stateless just because there may be a theoretical chance that

         one among the thousands of these foundlings might be the child of
         not just one, but two, foreigners is downright discriminatory,
         irrational, and unjust. It just doesn't make any sense. Given the
         statistical certainty — 99.9% — that any child born in the Philippines
         would be a natural born citizen, a decision denying foundlings such

         status is effectively a denial of their birthright. There is no reason why
         this Honorable Court should use an improbable hypothetical to
         sacriﬁce the fundamental political rights of an entire class of human
         beings. Your Honor, constitutional interpretation and the use of
         common sense are not separate disciplines.

         As a matter of law, foundlings are as a class, natural-born citizens.
   While the 1935 Constitution's enumeration is silent as to foundlings, there is

   no restrictive language which would deﬁnitely exclude foundlings either.
   Because of silence and ambiguity in the enumeration with respect to
   foundlings, there is a need to examine the intent of the framers. In Nitafan v.
                                         114
   Commissioner of Internal Revenue,        this Court held that:
               The ascertainment of that intent is but in keeping with the

         fundamental principle of constitutional construction that the intent of
         the framers of the organic law and of the people adopting it should be
         given eﬀect. The primary task in constitutional construction is to
         ascertain and thereafter assure the realization of the purpose of the
         framers and of the people in the adoption of the Constitution. It may

         also be safely assumed that the people in ratifying the Constitution
         were guided mainly by the explanation offered by the framers.  115

         As pointed out by petitioner as well as the Solicitor General, the
   deliberations of the 1934 Constitutional Convention show that the framers
   intended foundlings to be covered by the enumeration. The following

   exchange is recorded:
         Sr. Rafols:

         For an amendment. I propose that after subsection 2, the following is
               inserted: "The natural children of a foreign father and a Filipino
               mother not recognized by the father.

                                       xxx xxx xxx

         President:
         [We] would like to request a clariﬁcation from the proponent of the

               amendment. The gentleman refers to natural children or to any
               kind of illegitimate children?

         Sr. Rafols:
         To all kinds of illegitimate children. It also includes natural children of
               unknown parentage, natural or illegitimate children of unknown

               parents.
         Sr. Montinola:

         For clariﬁcation. The gentleman said "of unknown parents." Current
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                              cdasiaonline.com               codes consider them Filipino, that is, I refer to the Spanish Code

               wherein all children of unknown parentage born in Spanish
               territory are considered Spaniards, because the presumption is
               that a child of unknown parentage is the son of a Spaniard. This
               may be applied in the Philippines in that a child of unknown
               parentage born in the Philippines is deemed to be Filipino, and

               there is no need. . . .
         Sr. Rafols:

         There is a need, because we are relating the conditions that are
               [required] to be Filipino.

         Sr. Montinola:

         But that is the interpretation of the law, therefore, there is no [more]
               need for amendment.

         Sr. Rafols:
         The amendment should read thus: "Natural or illegitimate of a foreign

               father and a Filipino mother recognized by one, or the children of
               unknown parentage."

         Sr. Briones:
         The amendment [should] mean children born in the Philippines of
               unknown parentage.

         Sr. Rafols:

         The son of a Filipina to a Foreigner, although this [person] does not
               recognize the child, is not unknown.

         President:

         Does the gentleman accept the amendment or not?
         Sr. Rafols:

         I do not accept the amendment because the amendment would
               exclude the children of a Filipina with a foreigner who does not
               recognize the child. Their parentage is not unknown and I think

               those of overseas Filipino mother and father [whom the latter]
               does not recognize, should also be considered as Filipinos.

         President:
         The question in order is the amendment to the amendment from the

               Gentleman from Cebu, Mr. Briones.
         Sr. Busion:

         Mr. President, don't you think it would be better to leave this matter in
               the hands of the Legislature?

         Sr. Roxas:

         Mr. President, my humble opinion is that these cases are few and far in
               between, that the constitution need [not] refer to them. By
               international law the principle that children or people born in a
               country of unknown parents are citizens in this nation is
               recognized, and it is not necessary to include a provision on the

               subject exhaustively.  116

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                                 cdasiaonline.com        Though the Rafols amendment was not carried out, it was not because

  there was any objection to the notion that persons of "unknown parentage"
  are not citizens but only because their number was not enough to merit
  speciﬁc mention. Such was the account,      117 cited by petitioner, of delegate

  and constitution law author Jose Aruego who said:



              During the debates on this provision, Delegate Rafols presented
        an amendment to include as Filipino citizens the illegitimate children
        with a foreign father of a mother who was a citizen of the Philippines,
        and   also foundlings; but this amendment was defeated primarily
        because the Convention believed that the cases, being too few to

        warrant the inclusion of a provision in the Constitution to apply to
        them, should be governed by statutory legislation. Moreover, it was
        believed that the rules of international law were already clear to the
        eﬀect that illegitimate children followed the citizenship of the mother,
        and that foundlings followed the nationality of the place where they

        were found,     thereby making unnecessary the inclusion in the
        Constitution of the proposed amendment.
        This explanation was likewise the position of the Solicitor General

  during the 16 February 2016 Oral Arguments:

              We all know that the Rafols proposal was rejected. But note
        that what was declined was the proposal for a textual and explicit
        recognition of foundlings as Filipinos. And so, the way to explain the
        constitutional silence is by saying that it was the view of Montinola
        and Roxas which prevailed that there is no more need to expressly

        declare foundlings as Filipinos.
              Obviously, it doesn't matter whether Montinola's or Roxas'
        views   were   legally  correct.  Framers   of  a  constitution  can

        constitutionalize rules based on assumptions that are imperfect or
        even wrong. They can even overturn existing rules. This is basic.
        What matters here is that Montinola and Roxas were able to convince
        their colleagues in the convention that there is no more need to
        expressly declare foundlings as Filipinos because they are already

        impliedly so recognized.
              In other words, the constitutional silence is fully explained in

        terms of linguistic eﬃciency and the avoidance of redundancy. The
        policy is clear: it is to recognize foundlings, as a class, as Filipinos
        under Art. IV, Section 1 (3) of the 1935 Constitution. This inclusive
        policy is carried over into the 1973 and 1987 Constitution. It is
        appropriate to invoke a famous scholar as he was paraphrased by

        Chief Justice Fernando: the constitution is not silently silent, it is
        silently vocal.18
        The Solicitor General makes the further point that the framers "worked

  to create a just and humane society," that "they were reasonable patriots
  and that it would be unfair to impute upon them a discriminatory intent
  against foundlings." He exhorts that, given the grave implications of the

  argument that foundlings are not natural-born Filipinos, the Court must
  search the records of the 1935, 1973 and 1987 Constitutions "for an express

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                            cdasiaonline.com  intention to deny foundlings the status of Filipinos. The burden is on those

  who wish to use the constitution to discriminate against foundlings to show
  that the constitution really intended to take this path to the dark side and
  inflict this across the board marginalization."

        We ﬁnd no such intent or language permitting discrimination against
  foundlings. On the contrary, all three Constitutions guarantee the basic right
  to equal protection of the laws. All exhort the State to render social justice.

  Of special consideration are several provisions in the present charter: Article
  II, Section 11 which provides that the "State values the dignity of every
  human person and guarantees full respect for human rights," Article XIII,

  Section 1 which mandates Congress to "give highest priority to the
  enactment of measures that protect and enhance the right of all the people
  to human dignity, reduce social, economic, and political inequalities . . ." and
  Article XV, Section 3 which requires the State to defend the "right of children

  to assistance, including proper care and nutrition, and special protection
  from all forms of neglect, abuse, cruelty, exploitation, and other conditions
  prejudicial to their development." Certainly, these provisions contradict an

  intent to discriminate against foundlings on account of their unfortunate
  status.

        Domestic laws on adoption also support the principle that foundlings
  are Filipinos. These laws do not provide that adoption confers citizenship
  upon the adoptee. Rather, the adoptee must be a Filipino in the ﬁrst place to
  be adopted. The most basic of such laws is Article 15 of the Civil Code which

  provides that "[l]aws relating to family rights, duties, status, conditions, legal
  capacity of persons are binding on citizens of the Philippines even though
  living abroad." Adoption deals with status, and a Philippine adoption court

  will have jurisdiction only if the adoptee is a Filipino. In Ellis and Ellis v.
  Republic,  119 a child left by an unidentiﬁed mother was sought to be adopted
  by aliens. This Court said:

              In this connection, it should be noted that this is a proceedings
        in rem, which no court may entertain unless it has jurisdiction, not
        only over the subject matter of the case and over the parties, but also
        over the res, which is the personal status of Baby Rose as well as that
        of petitioners herein. Our Civil Code (Art. 15) adheres to the theory

        that jurisdiction over the status of a natural person is determined by
        the latter's nationality. Pursuant to this theory, we have jurisdiction
        over the status of Baby Rose, she being a citizen of the Philippines,
        but not over the status of the petitioners, who are foreigners.   120
        (Underlining supplied)

        Recent legislation is more direct. R.A. No. 8043 entitled "An Act
  Establishing the Rules to Govern the Inter-Country Adoption of Filipino

  Children and for Other Purposes" (otherwise known as the "Inter-Country
  Adoption Act of 1995"), R.A. No. 8552, entitled "An Act Establishing the Rules
  and Policies on the Adoption of Filipino Children and For Other Purposes"
  (otherwise known as the Domestic Adoption Act of 1998) and this Court's

  A.M. No. 02-6-02-SC or the "Rule on Adoption," all expressly refer to "Filipino
  children" and include foundlings as among Filipino children who may be
  adopted.
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                             cdasiaonline.com        It has been argued that the process to determine that the child is a

  foundling leading to the issuance of a foundling certiﬁcate under these laws
  and the issuance of said certiﬁcate are acts to acquire or perfect Philippine
  citizenship which make the foundling a naturalized Filipino at best. This is
  erroneous. Under Article IV, Section 2 "Natural-born citizens are those who

  are citizens of the Philippines from birth without having to perform any act to
  acquire or perfect their Philippine citizenship." In the ﬁrst place, "having to
  perform an act" means that the act must be personally done by the citizen.
  In this instance, the determination of foundling status is done not by the

  child but by the authorities.  121 Secondly, the object of the process is the
  determination of the whereabouts of the parents, not the citizenship of the
  child. Lastly, the process is certainly not analogous to naturalization

  proceedings to acquire Philippine citizenship, or the election of such
  citizenship by one born of an alien father and a Filipino mother under the
  1935 Constitution, which is an act to perfect it.

        In this instance, such issue is moot because there is no dispute that
  petitioner is a foundling, as evidenced by a Foundling Certiﬁcate issued in
              122
  her   favor.     The Decree of Adoption issued on 13 May 1974, which
  approved petitioner's adoption by Jesusa Sonora Poe and Ronald Allan Kelley
  Poe, expressly refers to Emiliano and his wife, Rosario Militar, as her
  "foundling parents," hence eﬀectively aﬃrming petitioner's status as a
             123
  foundling.
        Foundlings are likewise citizens under international law. Under the

  1987 Constitution, an international law can become part of the sphere of
  domestic law either by transformation or incorporation. The transformation
  method requires that an international law be transformed into a domestic
                                                                      124
  law through a constitutional mechanism such as local legislation.       On the
  other hand, generally accepted principles of international law, by virtue of
  the incorporation clause of the Constitution, form part of the laws of the land
  even if they do not derive from treaty obligations. Generally accepted

  principles of international law include international custom as evidence of a
  general practice accepted as law, and general principles of law recognized
  by civilized nations.  125  International customary rules are accepted as

  binding as a result from the combination of two elements: the established,
  widespread, and consistent practice on the part of States; and a
  psychological element known as the opinion juris sive necessitates (opinion
  as to law or necessity). Implicit in the latter element is a belief that the

  practice in question is rendered obligatory by the existence of a rule of law
  requiring it. 126 "General principles of law recognized by civilized nations"
  are principles "established by a process of reasoning" or judicial logic, based
                                                                    127
  on principles which are "basic to legal systems generally,"           such as
  "general principles of equity, i.e., the general principles of fairness and
  justice," and the "general principle against discrimination" which is
  embodied in the "Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International

  Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
  Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the
  Convention Against Discrimination in Education, the Convention (No. 111)

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                          cdasiaonline.com   Concerning Discrimination in Respect of Employment and Occupation."            128

   These are the same core principles which underlie the Philippine Constitution
   itself, as embodied in the due process and equal protection clauses of the
   Bill of Rights.29

         Universal Declaration of Human Rights ("UDHR") has been interpreted
   by this Court as part of the generally accepted principles of international law
                              130
   and binding on the State.      Article 15 thereof states:
         1. Everyone has the right to a nationality.

         2. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his nationality nor denied the
               right to change his nationality.



         The Philippines has also ratiﬁed the UN Convention on the Rights of the

   Child (UNCRC). Article 7 of the UNCRC imposes the following obligations on
   our country:

                                        Article 7
         1. The child shall be registered immediately after birth and shall have

               the right from birth to a name, the right to acquire a nationality
               and as far as possible, the right to know and be cared for by his
               or her parents.

         2. States Parties shall ensure the implementation of these rights in
               accordance with their national law and their obligations under the
               relevant international instruments in this ﬁeld, in particular
               where the child would otherwise be stateless.

         In 1986, the country also ratiﬁed the 1966 International Covenant on
   Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). Article 24 thereof provide for the right of
   every child "to acquire a nationality:"

                                       Article 24

         1. Every child shall have, without any discrimination as to race, colour,
               sex, language, religion, national or social origin, property or
               birth, the right, to such measures of protection as are required by
               his status as a minor, on the part of his family, society and the

               State.
         2. Every child shall be registered immediately after birth and shall have
               a name.

         3. Every child has the right to acquire a nationality.

         The common thread of the UDHR, UNCRC and ICCPR is to obligate the
   Philippines to grant nationality from birth and ensure that no child is
   stateless. This grant of nationality must be at the time of birth, and it cannot
   be accomplished by the application of our present naturalization laws,

   Commonwealth Act No. 473, as amended, and R.A. No. 9139, both of which
   require the applicant to be at least eighteen (18) years old.

         The principles found in two conventions, while yet unratiﬁed by the
   Philippines, are generally accepted principles of international law. The ﬁrst is
   Article 14 of the 1930 Hague Convention on Certain Questions Relating to

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                              cdasiaonline.com  the Conﬂict of Nationality Laws under which a foundling is presumed to have

  the "nationality of the country of birth," to wit:
                                     Article 14

              A child   whose parents are both unknown shall have the
        nationality of the country of birth. If the child's parentage is
        established, its nationality shall be determined by the rules applicable

        in cases where the parentage is known.
              A foundling is, until the contrary is proved, presumed to have
        been born on the territory of the State in which it was found.

        (Underlining supplied)
        The second is the principle that a foundling ispresumed born of

  citizens of the country where he is found, contained in Article 2 of the 1961
  United Nations Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness:

                                      Article 2
              A foundling found in the territory of a Contracting State shall, in
        the absence of proof to the contrary, be considered to have been

        born within the territory of parents possessing the nationality of that
        State.

        That the Philippines is not a party to the 1930 Hague Convention nor to
  the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness does not mean that
  their principles are not binding. While the Philippines is not a party to the
  1930 Hague Convention, it is a signatory to the Universal Declaration on

  Human Rights, Article 15 (1) of which  131 eﬀectively aﬃrms Article 14 of the
  1930 Hague Convention. Article 2 of the 1961 "United Nations Convention on
  the Reduction of Statelessness" merely "gives eﬀect" to Article 15 (1) of the

  UDHR.   132 In Razon v. Tagitis,133 this Court noted that the Philippines had
  not signed or ratiﬁed the "International Convention for the Protection of All
  Persons from Enforced Disappearance." Yet, we ruled that the proscription

  against enforced disappearances in the said convention was nonetheless
  binding as a "generally accepted principle of international law." Razon v.
  Tagitis is likewise notable for declaring the ban as a generally accepted

  principle of international law although the convention had been ratiﬁed by
  only sixteen states and had not even come into force and which needed the
  ratiﬁcation of a minimum of twenty states. Additionally, as petitioner points
  out, the Court was content with the practice of international and regional

  state organs, regional state practice in Latin America, and State Practice in
  the United States.

        Another case where the number of ratifying countries was not
  determinative is Mijares v. Rañada,  134 where only four countries had "either
  ratiﬁed or acceded to"    135 the 1966 "Convention on the Recognition and

  Enforcement of Foreign Judgments in Civil and Commercial Matters" when
  the case was decided in 2005. The Court also pointed out that that nine
  member countries of the European Common Market had acceded to the

  Judgments Convention. The Court also cited U.S. laws and jurisprudence on
  recognition of foreign judgments. In all, only the practices of fourteen
  countries were considered and yet, there was pronouncement that

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                          cdasiaonline.com  recognition of foreign judgments was widespread practice.

        Our approach in Razon and Mijares eﬀectively takes into account the
  fact that "generally accepted principles of international law" are based not
  only on international custom, but also on "general principles of law

  recognized by civilized nations," as the phrase is understood in Article 38.1
  paragraph (c) of the ICJ Statute. Justice, fairness, equity and the policy
  against discrimination, which are fundamental principles underlying the Bill
                                                                 136
  of Rights and which are "basic to legal systems generally,"        support the
  notion that the right against enforced disappearances and the recognition of
  foreign judgments, were correctly considered as "generally accepted
  principles of international law" under the incorporation clause.

        Petitioner's evidence  137 shows that at least sixty countries in Asia,
  North and South America, and Europe have passed legislation recognizing

  foundlings as its citizen. Forty-two (42) of those countries follow the jus
  sanguinis regime. Of the sixty, only thirty-three (33) are parties to the 1961
  Convention on Statelessness; twenty-six (26) are not signatories to the
  Convention. Also, the Chief Justice, at the 2 February 2016 Oral Arguments

  pointed out that in 166 out of 189 countries surveyed (or 87.83%),
  foundlings are recognized as citizens. These circumstances, including the
  practice of jus sanguinis countries, show that it is a generally accepted
  principle of international law to presume foundlings as having been born of

  nationals of the country in which the foundling is found.
        Current legislation reveals the adherence of the Philippines to this

  generally accepted principle of international law. In particular, R.A. No. 8552,
  R.A. No. 8042 and this Court's Rules on Adoption, expressly refer to "Filipino
  children." In all of them, foundlings are among the Filipino children who could
  be adopted. Likewise, it has been pointed that the DFA issues passports to

  foundlings. Passports are by law, issued only to citizens. This shows that
  even the executive department, acting through the DFA, considers
  foundlings as Philippine citizens.

        Adopting these legal principles from the 1930 Hague Convention and
  the 1961 Convention on Statelessness is rational and reasonable and

  consistent   with  the   jus  sanguinis  regime   in  our   Constitution.  The
  presumption of natural-born citizenship of foundlings stems from the
  presumption that their parents are nationals of the Philippines. As the
  empirical data provided by the PSA show, that presumption is at more than

  99% and is a virtual certainty.
        In sum, all of the international law conventions and instruments on the

  matter of nationality of foundlings were designed to address the plight of a
  defenseless class which suﬀers from a misfortune not of their own making.
  We cannot be restrictive as to their application if we are a country which
  calls itself civilized and a member of the community of nations. The Solicitor

  General's warning in his opening statement is relevant:
        . . . the total eﬀect of those documents is to signify to this Honorable

        Court that those treaties and conventions were drafted because the
        world community is concerned that the situation of foundlings
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                          cdasiaonline.com        renders them legally invisible. It would be tragically ironic if this
        Honorable Court ended up using the international instruments which

        seek to protect and uplift foundlings a tool to deny them political
        status or to accord them second-class citizenship. 138
                                    139
        The COMELEC also ruled          that petitioner's repatriation in July 2006
  under the provisions of R.A. No. 9225 did not result in the reacquisition of
  natural-born citizenship. The COMELEC reasoned that since the applicant

  must perform an act, what is reacquired is not "natural-born" citizenship but
  only plain "Philippine citizenship."

        The COMELEC's rule arrogantly disregards consistent jurisprudence on
  the matter of repatriation statutes in general and of R.A. No. 9225 in
  particular.

        In the seminal case ofBengson III v. HRET,           140  repatriation was

  explained as follows:
              Moreover, repatriation results in the recovery of the original
        nationality. This means that a naturalized Filipino who lost his

        citizenship will be restored to his prior status as a naturalized Filipino
        citizen. On the other hand, if he was originally a natural-born citizen
        before he lost his Philippine citizenship, he will be restored to his
        former status as a natural-born Filipino.

        R.A. No. 9225 is a repatriation statute and has been described as such
  in several cases. They include Sobejana-Condon v. COMELEC           141 where we

  described it as an "abbreviated repatriation process that restores one's
  Filipino citizenship . . . ." Also included is Parreño v. Commission on Audit, 142
  which    cited Tabasa v. Court of Appeals,      143 where we said that "[t]he

  repatriation of the former Filipino will allow him to recover his natural-born
  citizenship. Parreño v. Commission on Audit          141 is categorical that "if
  petitioner reacquires his Filipino citizenship (under R.A. No. 9225), he will . . .

  recover his natural-born citizenship."
        The COMELEC construed the phrase "from birth" in the deﬁnition of

  natural citizens as implying "that natural-born citizenship must begin at birth
  and remain uninterrupted and continuous from birth." R.A. No. 9225 was
  obviously passed in line with Congress' sole prerogative to determine how

  citizenship may be lost or reacquired. Congress saw it ﬁt to decree that
  natural-born citizenship may be reacquired even if it had been once lost. It is
  not for the COMELEC to disagree with the Congress' determination.



        More importantly, COMELEC's position that natural-born status must be

  continuous was already rejected in Bengson III v. HRET      145where the phrase
  "from birth" was clariﬁed to mean at the time of birth: "A person who at the
  time of his birth, is a citizen of a particular country, is a natural-born citizen

  thereof." Neither is "repatriation" an act to "acquire or perfect" one's
  citizenship. In Bengson III v. HRET, this Court pointed out that there are only
  two types of citizens under the 1987 Constitution: natural-born citizen and

  naturalized, and that there is no third category for repatriated citizens:
              It is apparent from the enumeration of who are citizens under
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                             cdasiaonline.com        the present Constitution that there are only two classes of citizens:
        (1) those who are natural-born and (2) those who are naturalized in

        accordance with law. A citizen who is not a naturalized Filipino, i.e.,
        did not have to undergo the process of naturalization to obtain
        Philippine  citizenship,  necessarily  is  a   natural-born  Filipino.
        Noteworthy is the absence in said enumeration of a separate
        category   for  persons  who,   after  losing Philippine  citizenship,
        subsequently reacquire it. The reason therefor is clear: as to such

        persons, they would either be natural-born or naturalized depending
        on the reasons for the loss of their citizenship and the mode
        prescribed by the applicable law for the reacquisition thereof. As
        respondent Cruz was not required by law to go through naturalization
        proceedings in order to reacquire his citizenship, he is perforce a

        natural-born Filipino. As such, he possessed all the necessary
        qualiﬁcations  to   be  elected   as  member     of  the  House    of
        Representatives. 146

        The COMELEC cannot reverse a judicial precedent. That is reserved to
  this Court. And while we may always revisit a doctrine, a new rule reversing
  standing doctrine cannot be retroactively applied. In Morales v. Court of
                                             147
  Appeals and Jejomar Erwin S. Binay, Jr.,       where we decreed reversed the
  condonation doctrine, we cautioned that it "should be prospective in
  application for the reason that judicial decisions applying or interpreting the
  laws of the Constitution, until reversed, shall form part of the legal system of

  the Philippines." This Court also said that "while the future may ultimately
  uncover a doctrine's error, it should be, as a general rule, recognized as
  good law prior to its abandonment. Consequently, the people's reliance
                                     148
  thereupon should be respected."
        Lastly, it was repeatedly pointed out during the oral arguments that

  petitioner committed a falsehood when she put in the spaces for "born to" in
  her application for repatriation under R.A. No. 9225 the names of her
  adoptive parents, and this misled the BI to presume that she was a natural-

  born Filipino. It has been contended that the data required were the names
  of her biological parents which are precisely unknown.

        This position disregards one important fact — petitioner was legally
  adopted. One of the eﬀects of adoption is "to sever all legal ties between the
  biological parents and the adoptee, except when the biological parent is the
                            149
  spouse of the adoptee."       Under R.A. No. 8552, petitioner was also entitled
  to an amended birth certiﬁcate "attesting to the fact that the adoptee is the
  child of the adopter(s)" and which certiﬁcate "shall not bear any notation
                                  150
  that it is an amended issue."       That law also requires that "[a]ll records,
  books, and papers relating to the adoption cases in the ﬁles of the court, the
  Department [of Social Welfare and Development], or any other agency or
  institution participating in the adoption proceedings shall be kept strictly

  conﬁdential."   151 The law therefore allows petitioner to state that her
  adoptive parents were her birth parents as that was what would be stated in
  her birth certiﬁcate anyway. And given the policy of strict conﬁdentiality of

  adoption records, petitioner was not obligated to disclose that she was an
  adoptee.

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                            cdasiaonline.com        Clearly, to avoid a direct ruling on the qualiﬁcations of petitioner, which
  it cannot make in the same case for cancellation of COC, it resorted to

  opinionatedness    which    is,  moreover, erroneous.   The   whole   process
  undertaken by COMELEC is wrapped in grave abuse of discretion.

                                 On Residence
        The tainted process was repeated in disposing of the issue of whether

  or not petitioner committed false material representation when she stated in
  her COC that she has before and until 9 May 2016 been a resident of the
  Philippines for ten (10) years and eleven (11) months.

        Petitioner's claim that she will have been a resident for ten (10) years
  and eleven (11) months on the day before the 2016 elections, is true.

        The Constitution requires presidential candidates to have ten (10)
  years' residence in the Philippines before the day of the elections. Since the

  forthcoming elections will be held on 9 May 2016, petitioner must have been
  a resident of the Philippines prior to 9 May 2016 for ten (10) years. In answer
  to the requested information of "Period of Residence in the Philippines up to
  the day before May 09, 2016," she put in "10 years 11 months" which

  according to her pleadings in these cases corresponds to a beginning date of
  25 May 2005 when she returned for good from the U.S.

        When petitioner immigrated to the U.S. in 1991, she lost her original
  domicile, which is the Philippines. There are three requisites to acquire a
  new domicile: 1. Residence or bodily presence in a new locality; 2. an
  intention to remain there; and 3. an intention to abandon the old domicile.
  152
      To successfully eﬀect a change of domicile, one must demonstrate an
  actual removal or an actual change of domicile; a bona ﬁde intention of
  abandoning the former place of residence and establishing a new one and
  deﬁnite acts which correspond with the purpose. In other words, there must

  basically  be animus manendi coupled with animus non revertendi. The
  purpose to remain in or at the domicile of choice must be for an indeﬁnite
  period of time; the change of residence must be voluntary; and the
                                                                      153
  residence at the place chosen for the new domicile must be actual.
        Petitioner presented voluminous evidence showing that she and her

  family abandoned their U.S. domicile and relocated to the Philippines for
  good. These evidence include petitioner's former U.S. passport showing her
  arrival on 24 May 2005 and her return to the Philippines every time she
  travelled abroad; e-mail correspondences starting in March 2005 to

  September 2006 with a freight company to arrange for the shipment of their
  household items weighing about 28,000 pounds to the Philippines; e-mail
  with the Philippine Bureau of Animal Industry inquiring how to ship their dog
  to the Philippines; school records of her children showing enrollment in

  Philippine schools starting June 2005 and for succeeding years; tax
  identiﬁcation card for petitioner issued on July 2005; titles for condominium
  and parking slot issued in February 2006 and their corresponding tax
  declarations issued in April 2006; receipts dated 23 February 2005 from the

  Salvation Army in the U.S. acknowledging donation of items from petitioner's
  family; March 2006 e-mail to the U.S. Postal Service conﬁrming request for
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                         cdasiaonline.com  change of address; ﬁnal statement from the First American Title Insurance

  Company showing sale of their U.S. home on 27 April 2006; 12 July 2011
  ﬁlled-up questionnaire submitted to the U.S. Embassy where petitioner
  indicated that she had been a Philippine resident since May 2005; aﬃdavit
  from Jesusa Sonora Poe (attesting to the return of petitioner on 24 May 2005

  and that she and her family stayed with aﬃant until the condominium was
  purchased); and Aﬃdavit from petitioner's husband (conﬁrming that the
  spouses jointly decided to relocate to the Philippines in 2005 and that he

  stayed behind in the U.S. only to ﬁnish some work and to sell the family
  home).

        The foregoing evidence were undisputed and the facts were even listed
  by the COMELEC, particularly in its Resolution in the Tatad, Contreras and
  Valdez cases.

        However, the COMELEC refused to consider that petitioner's domicile

  had been timely changed as of 24 May 2005. At the oral arguments,
  COMELEC Commissioner Arthur Lim conceded the presence of the ﬁrst two
  requisites, namely, physical presence and animus manendi, but maintained
  there was no animus non-revertendi.      154 The COMELEC disregarded the

  import of all the evidence presented by petitioner on the basis of the
  position that the earliest date that petitioner could have started residence in
  the Philippines was in July 2006 when her application under R.A. No. 9225

  was approved by the BI. In this regard, COMELEC relied on Coquilla v.
  COMELEC,   155 Japzon v. COMELEC   156 and Caballero v. COMELEC.   157During
  the oral arguments, the private respondents also added Reyes v. COMELEC.
  158
      Respondents contend that these cases decree that the stay of an alien
  former Filipino cannot be counted until he/she obtains a permanent resident
  visa or reacquires Philippine citizenship, a visa-free entry under a balikbayan
  stamp being insuﬃcient. Since petitioner was still an American (without any

  resident visa) until her reacquisition of citizenship under R.A. No. 9225, her
  stay from 24 May 2005 to 7 July 2006 cannot be counted.

        But as the petitioner pointed out, the facts in these four cases are very
  diﬀerent from her situation. In Coquilla v. COMELEC,   159 the only evidence
  presented was a community tax certiﬁcate secured by the candidate and his

  declaration that he would be running in the elections. Japzon v. COMELEC  160
  did not involve a candidate who wanted to count residence prior to his
  reacquisition of Philippine citizenship. With the Court decreeing that

  residence is distinct from citizenship, the issue there was whether the
  candidate's acts after reacquisition suﬃced to establish residence. In
  Caballero v. COMELEC,  161 the candidate admitted that his place of work was

  abroad and that he only visited during his frequent vacations. In Reyes v.
  COMELEC,   162 the candidate was found to be an American citizen who had
  not even reacquired Philippine citizenship under R.A. No. 9225 or had
  renounced her U.S. citizenship. She was disqualiﬁed on the citizenship issue.

  On residence, the only proof she oﬀered was a seven-month stint as
  provincial oﬃcer. The COMELEC, quoted with approval by this Court, said
  that "such fact alone is not sufficient to prove her one-year residency."

        It is obvious that because of the sparse evidence on residence in the
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                         cdasiaonline.com  four cases cited by the respondents, the Court had no choice but to hold that

  residence could be counted only from acquisition of a permanent resident
  visa or from reacquisition of Philippine citizenship. In contrast, the evidence
  of petitioner is overwhelming and taken together leads to no other
  conclusion that she decided to permanently abandon her U.S. residence

  (selling the house, taking the children from U.S. schools, getting quotes from
  the freight company, notifying the U.S. Post Oﬃce of the abandonment of
  their address in the U.S., donating excess items to the Salvation Army, her
  husband resigning from U.S. employment right after selling the U.S. house)

  and permanently relocate to the Philippines and actually re-established her
  residence here on 24 May 2005 (securing T.I.N., enrolling her children in
  Philippine schools, buying property here, constructing a residence here,

  returning to the Philippines after all trips abroad, her husband getting
  employed here). Indeed, coupled with her eventual application to reacquire
  Philippine citizenship and her family's actual continuous stay in the
  Philippines over the years, it is clear that when petitioner returned on 24

  May 2005 it was for good.

        In this connection, the COMELEC also took it against petitioner that she
  had entered the Philippines visa-free as a balikbayan. A closer look at R.A.
  No. 6768 as amended, otherwise known as the "An Act Instituting a
  Balikbayan Program," shows that there is no overriding intent to treat

  balikbayans as temporary visitors who must leave after one year. Included in
  the law is a former Filipino who has been naturalized abroad and "comes or
  returns to the Philippines."   163 The law institutes a balikbayan program

  "providing the opportunity to avail of the necessary training to enable the
  balikbayan to become economically self-reliant members of society upon
  their return to the country"  164in line with the government's "reintegration
  program."  165 Obviously, balikbayans are not ordinary transients.

        Given the law's express policy to facilitate the return of abalikbayan
  and help him reintegrate into society, it would be an unduly harsh conclusion

  to say in absolute terms that the balikbayan must leave after one year. That
  visa-free period is obviously granted him to allow him to re-establish his life
  and reintegrate himself into the community before he attends to the

  necessary formal and legal requirements of repatriation. And that is exactly
  what petitioner did — she reestablished life here by enrolling her children
  and buying property while awaiting the return of her husband and then
  applying for repatriation shortly thereafter.

        No case similar to petitioner's, where the former Filipino's evidence of
  change in domicile is extensive and overwhelming, has as yet been decided

  by the Court. Petitioner's evidence of residence is unprecedented. There is
  no judicial precedent that comes close to the facts of residence of petitioner.
  There is no indication in Coquilla v. COMELEC,  166 and the other cases cited

  by the respondents that the Court intended to have its rulings there apply to
  a situation where the facts are diﬀerent. Surely, the issue of residence has
  been decided particularly on the facts-of-the case basis.

        To avoid the logical conclusion pointed out by the evidence of
  residence of petitioner, the COMELEC ruled that petitioner's claim of
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                          cdasiaonline.com  residence of ten (10) years and eleven (11) months by 9 May 2016 in her
  2015 COC was false because she put six (6) years and six (6) months as

  "period of residence before May 13, 2013" in her 2012 COC for Senator.
  Thus, according to the COMELEC, she started being a Philippine resident only
  in November 2006. In doing so, the COMELEC automatically assumed as true

  the statement in the 2012 COC and the 2015 COC as false.
        As explained by petitioner in her veriﬁed pleadings, she misunderstood

  the date required in the 2013 COC as the period of residence as of the day
  she submitted that COC in 2012. She said that she reckoned residency from
  April-May 2006 which was the period when the U.S. house was sold and her
  husband returned to the Philippines. In that regard, she was advised by her

  lawyers in 2015 that residence could be counted from 25 May 2005.
        Petitioner's explanation that she misunderstood the query in 2012

  (period of residence before 13 May 2013) as inquiring about residence as of
  the time she submitted the COC, is bolstered by the change which the
  COMELEC itself introduced in the 2015 COC which is now "period of
  residence in the Philippines up to the day before May 09, 2016." The

  COMELEC would not have revised the query if it did not acknowledge that
  the first version was vague.

        That petitioner could have reckoned residence from a date earlier than
  the sale of her U.S. house and the return of her husband is plausible given
  the evidence that she had returned a year before. Such evidence, to repeat,
  would include her passport and the school records of her children.

        It was grave abuse of discretion for the COMELEC to treat the 2012
  COC as a binding and conclusive admission against petitioner. It could be

  given in evidence against her, yes, but it was by no means conclusive. There
  is precedent after all where a candidate's mistake as to period of residence
  made in a COC was overcome by evidence.             In Romualdez-Marcos v.
             167
  COMELEC,       the candidate mistakenly put seven (7) months as her period
  of residence where the required period was a minimum of one year. We said
  that "[i]t is the fact of residence, not a statement in a certiﬁcate of
  candidacy which ought to be decisive in determining whether or not an

  individual   has   satisﬁed   the   constitution's  residency    qualiﬁcation
  requirement." The COMELEC ought to have looked at the evidence presented
  and see if petitioner was telling the truth that she was in the Philippines from
  24 May 2005. Had the COMELEC done its duty, it would have seen that the

  2012 COC and the 2015 COC both correctly stated the pertinent period of
  residency.

        The COMELEC, by its own admission, disregarded the evidence that
  petitioner actually and physically returned here on 24 May 2005 not because
  it was false, but only because COMELEC took the position that domicile could
  be established only from petitioner's repatriation under R.A. No. 9225 in July

  2006. However, it does not take away the fact that in reality, petitioner had
  returned from the U.S. and was here to stay permanently, on 24 May 2005.
  When she claimed to have been a resident for ten (10) years and eleven (11)
  months, she could do so in good faith.

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                         cdasiaonline.com        For another, it could not be said that petitioner was attempting to hide
  anything. As already stated, a petition for quo warranto had been ﬁled

  against her with the SET as early as August 2015. The event from which the
  COMELEC pegged the commencement of residence, petitioner's repatriation
  in July 2006 under R.A. No. 9225, was an established fact to repeat, for

  purposes of her senatorial candidacy.
        Notably, on the statement of residence of six (6) years and six (6)

  months in the 2012 COC, petitioner recounted that this was ﬁrst brought up
  in the media on 2 June 2015 by Rep. Tobias Tiangco of the United Nationalist
  Alliance. Petitioner appears to have answered the issue immediately, also in
  the press. Respondents have not disputed petitioner's evidence on this point.

  From that time therefore when Rep. Tiangco discussed it in the media, the
  stated period of residence in the 2012 COC and the circumstances that
  surrounded the statement were already matters of public record and were
  not hidden.

        Petitioner likewise proved that the 2012 COC was also brought up in
  the SET petition for quo warranto. Her Veriﬁed Answer, which was ﬁled on 1

  September 2015, admitted that she made a mistake in the 2012 COC when
  she put in six (6) years and six (6) months as she misunderstood the
  question and could have truthfully indicated a longer period. Her answer in
  the SET case was a matter of public record. Therefore, when petitioner

  accomplished her COC for President on 15 October 2015, she could not be
  said to have been attempting to hide her erroneous statement in her 2012
  COC for Senator which was expressly mentioned in her Verified Answer.

        The facts now, if not stretched to distortion, do not show or even hint
  at an intention to hide the 2012 statement and have it covered by the 2015
  representation.   Petitioner, moreover,    has  on   her   side  this  Court's

  pronouncement that:
              Concededly, a candidate's disqualiﬁcation to run for public

        oﬃce does not necessarily constitute material misrepresentation
        which is the sole ground for denying due course to, and for the
        cancellation of, a COC. Further, as already discussed, the candidate's
        misrepresentation in his COC must not only refer to a material fact
        (eligibility and qualiﬁcations for elective oﬃce), but should evince a
        deliberate intent to mislead, misinform or hide a fact which would
        otherwise render a candidate ineligible. It must be made with an

        intention to deceive the electorate as to one's qualiﬁcations to run for
        public office.68
        In sum, the COMELEC, with the same posture of infallibilism, virtually

  ignored a good number of evidenced dates all of which can evince animus
  manendi to the Philippines and animus non revertendi to the United States of
  America. The veracity of the events of coming and staying home was as
  much as dismissed as inconsequential, the focus having been ﬁxed at the

  petitioner's "sworn declaration in her COC for Senator" which the COMELEC
  said "amounts to a declaration and therefore an admission that her
  residence in the Philippines only commence sometime in November 2006";

  such that "based on this declaration, [petitioner] fails to meet the residency
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                         cdasiaonline.com  requirement for President." This conclusion, as already shown, ignores the

  standing jurisprudence that it is the fact of residence, not the statement of
  the person that determines residence for purposes of compliance with the
  constitutional requirement of residency for election as President. It ignores
  the easily researched matter that cases on questions of residency have been

  decided favorably for the candidate on the basis of facts of residence far less
  in number, weight and substance than that presented by petitioner.        169 It
  ignores, above all else, what we consider as a primary reason why petitioner

  cannot be bound by her declaration in her COC for Senator which declaration
  was not even considered by the SET as an issue against her eligibility for
  Senator. When petitioner made the declaration in her COC for Senator that

  she has been a resident for a period of six (6) years and six (6) months
  counted up to the 13 May 2013 Elections, she naturally had as reference the
  residency requirements for election as Senator which was satisﬁed by her

  declared years of residence. It was uncontested during the oral arguments
  before us that at the time the declaration for Senator was made, petitioner
  did not have as yet any intention to vie for the Presidency in 2016 and that
  the general public was never made aware by petitioner, by word or action,

  that she would run for President in 2016. Presidential candidacy has a
  length-of-residence diﬀerent from that of a senatorial candidacy. There are
  facts of residence other than that which was mentioned in the COC for

  Senator. Such other facts of residence have never been proven to be false,
  and these, to repeat include:

              [Petitioner] returned to the Philippines on 24 May 2005.
        [petitioner's] husband however stayed in the USA to ﬁnish pending
        projects and arrange the sale of their family home.

              Meanwhile [petitioner] and her children lived with her mother in
        San Juan City. [Petitioner] enrolled Brian in Beacon School in Taguig
        City in 2005 and Hanna in Assumption College in Makati City in 2005.
        Anika was enrolled in Learning Connection in San Juan in 2007, when
        she was already old enough to go to school.

              In the second half of 2005, [petitioner] and her husband
        acquired Unit 7F of One Wilson Place Condominium in San Juan.
        [Petitioner] and her family lived in Unit 7F until the construction of

        their family home in Corinthian Hills was completed.
              Sometime in the second half of 2005, [petitioner's] mother
        discovered that her former lawyer who handled [petitioner's]

        adoption in 1974 failed to secure from the Oﬃce of the Civil Registrar
        of Iloilo a new Certiﬁcate of Live Birth indicating [petitioner's] new
        name and stating that her parents are "Ronald Allan K. Poe" and
        "Jesusa L. Sonora."

              In February 2006, [petitioner] travelled brieﬂy to the US in
        order to supervise the disposal of some of the family's remaining
        household belongings. [Petitioner] returned to the Philippines on 11
        March 2006.

              In late March 2006, [petitioner's] husband informed the United
        States Postal Service of the family's abandonment of their address in
        the US.

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                           cdasiaonline.com              The family home in the US was solen on 27 April 2006.

              In April 2006, [petitioner's] husband resigned from his work in
        the US. He returned to the Philippines on 4 May 2006 and began
        working for a Philippine company in July 2006.

              In early 2006, [petitioner] and her husband acquired a vacant
        lot in Corinthian Hills, where they eventually built their family home.
        170

        In light of all these, it was arbitrary for the COMELEC to satisfy its
  intention to let the case fall under the exclusive ground of false
  representation, to consider no other date than that mentioned by petitioner

  in her COC for Senator.
        All put together, in the matter of the citizenship and residence of

  petitioner for her candidacy as President of the Republic, the questioned
  Resolutions of the COMELEC in Division and En Banc are, one and all, deadly
  diseased with grave abuse of discretion from root to fruits.

        WHEREFORE, the petition is GRANTED. The Resolutions, to wit:

        1. dated 1 December 2015 rendered through the COMELEC Second
  Division, in SPA No. 15-001 (DC), entitled Estrella C. Elamparo, petitioner, vs.

  Mary Grace Natividad Sonora Poe-Llamanzares, respondent, stating that:
        [T]he Certiﬁcate of Candidacy for President of the Republic of the

        Philippines in the May 9, 2016 National and Local Elections ﬁled by
        respondent Mary Grace Natividad Sonora Poe-Llamanzares is hereby
        GRANTED.

        2. dated 11 December 2015, rendered through the COMELEC First
  Division, in the consolidated cases SPA No. 15-002 (DC) entitled Francisco S.
  Tatad, petitioner, vs. Mary Grace Natividad Sonora Poe-Llamanzares,

  respondent; SPA No. 15-007 (DC) entitledAntonio P. Contreras, petitioner,
  vs. Mary Grace Natividad Sonora Poe-Llamanzares, respondent; and SPA No.
  15-139 (DC) entitled Amado D. Valdez, petitioner, v. Mary Grace Natividad
  Sonora Poe-Llamanzares, respondent; stating that:

              WHEREFORE, premises considered, the Commission RESOLVED,
        as it hereby RESOLVES, to GRANT the petitions and cancel the

        Certiﬁcate of Candidacy of MARY GRACE NATIVIDAD SONORA POE-
        LLAMANZARES for the elective position of President of the Republic of
        the Philippines in connection with the 9 May 2016 Synchronized Local
        and National Elections.

        3. dated 23 December 2015 of the COMELECEn Banc, upholding the 1
  December 2015 Resolution of the Second Division stating that:

              WHEREFORE, premises considered, the Commission RESOLVED,
        as  it  hereby   RESOLVES,   to  DENY    the  Veriﬁed  Motion   for
        Reconsideration of SENATOR MARY GRACE NATIVIDAD SONORA POE-
        LLAMANZARES. The Resolution dated 11 December 2015 of the

        Commission First Division is AFFIRMED.
        4. dated 23 December 2015 of the COMELECEn Banc, upholding the 11

  December 2015 Resolution of the First Division.
  are hereby ANNULLED and SET ASIDE. Petitioner MARY GRACE NATIVIDAD
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                          cdasiaonline.com   SONORA POE-LLAMANZARES is DECLARED QUALIFIED to be a candidate

   for President in the National and Local Elections of 9 May 2016.
         SO ORDERED.

         Bersamin and Mendoza, JJ., concur.

         Sereno, C.J., Velasco, Jr., Leonen, Jardeleza and Caguioa, JJ., see
   Concurring Opinion.

         Carpio, Brion, Del Castillo and Perlas-Bernabe, JJ., see dissenting

   opinion.
         Leonardo-de Castro, J., please see Separate Dissenting Opinion.

         Peralta, J., I join J. Caguioa's opinion.

         Reyes, J., I concur with the Dissenting Opinion of Justice Perlas-
   Bernabe.



    Footnotes

   1. Petition for Certiorari in G.R. Nos. 221698-700, pp. 15-16; COMELEC First
          Division Resolution dated 11 December 2015 in SPA No. 15-002 (DC), SPA

          No. 15-007 (DC) and SPA No. 15-139 (DC), p. 2.

   2. Petition for Certiorari, id. at 16-17.

   3. COMELEC First Division Resolution, supra note 1 at 4.

   4. Petition for Certiorari, supra note 1 at 22.

   5. Id. at 17; Comment (on the Petition for Certiorari in G.R. No. 221697) ﬁled by
          respondent COMELEC dated 11 January 2016, p. 6.

   6. Petition for Certiorari, id.; id. at 7.

   7. Id. at 18.

   8. Supra note 6.

   9. Id.

   10. COMELEC First Division Resolution, supra note 1 at 3.

   11. Petition for Certiorari, supra note 1 at 17.

   12. Id. at 18.

   13. Id.

   14. COMELEC First Division Resolution, supra note 10.

   15. Id.

   16. Supra note 1 at 17-18.

   17. COMELEC First Division Resolution, supra note 10.

   18. Id.

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                                 cdasiaonline.com   19. Id.

   20. Petition for Certiorari, supra note 1 at 20.

   21. Id.

   22. Supra note 3.

   23. Supra note 20.


   24. Supra note 3.

   25. Supra note 20.

   26. Supra note 3.

   27. Petition for Certiorari, supra note 4.

   28. Id.

   29. Id. at 23; COMELEC First Division Resolution, supra note 3.

   30. Id.; id.

   31. Id.; id.

   32. Id.; id.

   33. Id. at 23-24; COMELEC First Division Resolution, supra note 1 at 5.

   34. Id. at 24; id.

   35. Id.

   36. Supra note 34.

   37. Petition for Certiorari, supra note 1 at 25; COMELEC First Division Resolution,
           supra note 1 at 5.

   38. Id. at 25-26; id.

   39. Id. at 26; id.

   40. Id.; id.

   41. Id.; id.


   42. Id. at 32; id. at 6.

   43. Supra note 39.

   44. Petition   for Certiorari, supra note 1 at 26-27; COMELEC First Division
           Resolution, supra note 1 at 5.

   45. Section 5, R.A. No. 9225 states:

      SEC. 5. Civil and Political Rights and Liabilities. — Those who retain or re-
           acquire Philippine citizenship under this Act shall enjoy full civil and
           political rights   and   be   subject   to   all  attendant    liabilities and

           responsibilities under existing laws of the Philippines and the following
           conditions:

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                                  cdasiaonline.com                                        xxx xxx xxx

     3. Those appointed to any public oﬃce shall subscribe and swear to an oath of

          allegiance to the Republic of the Philippines and its duly constituted
          authorities prior to their assumption of oﬃce: Provided, That they
          renounce their oath of allegiance to the country where they took that
          oath;

                                        xxx xxx xxx

   46. Petition for Certiorari, supra note 1 at 27.

   47. Id. at 29.

   48. Supra note 46; supra note 1 at 6.

   49. Petition for Certiorari, supra note 1 at 30; id.

   50. Id.


   51. Supra note 48.

   52. Petition for Certiorari, supra note 1 at 31; COMELEC First Division Resolution,
          supra note 1 at 6.

   53. Comment, supra note 5 at 9.

   54. Petition for Certiorari, supra note 1 at 31.

   55. Id. at 32; Comment, supra note 53 at 10.

   56. Id.; COMELEC First Division Resolution, supra note 1 at 6.

   57. Id.; id. at 7.

   58. Id.; id.

   59. Comment (on the Petition in G.R. No. 221697) ﬁled by respondent Elamparo,
          dated January 6, 2016, p. 7.

   60. COMELEC Second Division Resolution dated December 1, 2015 in SPA No. 15-

          001 (DC), p. 7.

   61. Id. at 7-8.

   62. Supra note 60.

   63. Id.

   64. Id. at 8.

   65. Id.

   66. Petition for Certiorari in G.R. No. 221697, p. 7.

   67. Supra note 64.

   68. Petition   for Certiorari, supra note 65 at 8; COMELEC Second Division
          Resolution, supra note 60 at 8-11.

   69. COMELEC Second Division Resolution, supra note 60 at 34.

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                                  cdasiaonline.com   70. Comment, supra note 59 at 10.

   71. Section 1 of Rule 25 of the COMELEC Rules of Procedure, as amended, states:

   Rule 25 — Disqualification of Candidates

   Section 1. Grounds. — Any candidate who, in an action or protest in which he is a

          party, is declared by ﬁnal decision of a competent court, guilty of, or
          found by the Commission to be suﬀering from any disqualiﬁcation
          provided by law or the Constitution.

   A Petition to Disqualify a Candidate invoking grounds for a Petition to Deny to or
          Cancel a Certiﬁcate of Candidacy or Petition to Declare a Candidate as a

          Nuisance Candidate, or a combination thereof, shall be summarily
          dismissed.

   72. Petition to Disqualify dated 19 October 2015 ﬁled by Tatad in SPA No. 15-002
          (DC), p. 9.

   73. Id., at 9 and 14.

   74. Id. at 10.

   75. Id. at 12.

   76. Id. at 11.

   77. COMELEC First Division Resolution, supra note 1 at 8.

   78. Id.

   79. Petition to Disqualify, supra note 72 at 11.

   80. Id. at 21.

   81. Id.

   82. Id.

   83. Supra note 1 at 8.


   84. Id.

   85. Contreras' petition is a petition for cancellation of Grace Poe's COC under
          Section 78 of the Omnibus Election Code which states that:

   Sec. 78. Petition to deny due course to or cancel a certiﬁcate of candidacy. — A
          veriﬁed petition seeking to deny due course or to cancel a certiﬁcate of
          candidacy may be ﬁled by the person exclusively on the ground that any
          material representation contained therein as required under Section 74

          hereof is false. The petition may be filed at any time not later than twenty-
          ﬁve days from the time of the ﬁling of the certiﬁcate of candidacy and
          shall be decided, after due notice and hearing, not later than ﬁfteen days
          before the election.

   86. Petition for Cancellation of Grace Poe's COC dated 17 October 2015 ﬁled by

          Contreras in SPA No. 15-007 (DC), pp. 2-4.

   87. Id. at 3; Petition for Certiorari, supra note 1 at 13.

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                                 cdasiaonline.com   88. Id. at 3-4.

   89. Sections 12 and 68 of the Omnibus Election Code provide:

   Sec. 12. Disqualifications. — Any person who has been declared by competent

          authority insane or incompetent, or has been sentenced by ﬁnal judgment
          for subversion, insurrection, rebellion or for any oﬀense for which he has
          been sentenced to a penalty of more than eighteen months or for a crime
          involving moral turpitude, shall be disqualiﬁed to be a candidate and to
          hold any oﬃce, unless he has been given plenary pardon or granted

          amnesty.

    This disqualiﬁcations to be a candidate herein provided shall be deemed
          removed upon the declaration by competent authority that said insanity
          or incompetence had been removed or after the expiration of a period of
          ﬁve years from his service of sentence, unless within the same period he

          again becomes disqualified.

   Sec. 68. Disqualifications. — Any candidate who, in an action or protest in which
          he is a party is declared by ﬁnal decision of a competent court guilty of, or
          found by the Commission of having (a) given money or other material
          consideration to inﬂuence, induce or corrupt the voters or public oﬃcials
          performing electoral functions; (b) committed acts of terrorism to enhance

          his candidacy; (c) spent in his election campaign an amount in excess of
          that allowed by this Code; (d) solicited, received or made any contribution
          prohibited under Sections 89, 95, 96, 97 and 104; or (e) violated any of
          Sections 80, 83, 85, 86 and 261, paragraphs d, e, k, v, and cc, sub-

          paragraph 6, shall be disqualiﬁed from continuing as a candidate, or if he
          has been elected, from holding the oﬃce. Any person who is a permanent
          resident of or an immigrant to a foreign country shall not be qualiﬁed to
          run for any elective oﬃce under this Code, unless said person has waived
          his status as permanent resident or immigrant of a foreign country in

          accordance with the residence requirement provided for in the election
          laws.

   90. COMELEC First Division Resolution, supra note 1 at 12.

   91. Id. at 10.

   92. Id.

   93. Id. at 9.

   94. Id.

   95. Id.

   96. Id.

   97. Id.

   98. Id.

   99. Id. at 9-10.

   100. Id. at 10.

   101. Id.

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                               cdasiaonline.com   102. Id.

   103. The 11 December 2015 Resolution of the COMELEC First Division was

          concurred in by Commissioners Louie Tito F. Guia and Ma. Rowena Amelia
          V. Guanzon. Presiding Commissioner Christian Robert S. Lim issued a
          Separate Dissenting Opinion.

   104. 318 Phil. 329 (1995).

   105. 595 Phil. 449 (2008).

   106. Romualdez-Marcos v. COMELEC, supra note 104 at 396-397.

   107. Id. at 397-398; Fermin v. COMELEC, supra note 105 at 471-472.

   108. In A.M. No. 02-6-02-SC, Resolution Approving the Proposed Rule on Adoption
          (Domestic and Inter-Country), eﬀective 22 August 2002, "foundling" is

          deﬁned as "a deserted or abandoned infant or child whose parents,
          guardian or relatives are unknown; or a child committed to an orphanage
          or charitable or similar institution with unknown facts of birth and
          parentage and registered in the Civil Register as a "foundling."

   109. Article IV — Citizenship.

   Sec. 1. The following are citizens of the Philippines:

   (1) Those who are citizens of the Philippine Islands at the time of the adoption of

          this Constitution.

    (2) Those born in the Philippine Islands of foreign parents who, before the
          adoption of this Constitution, had been elected to public oﬃce in the
          Philippine Islands.

   (3) Those whose fathers are citizens of the Philippines.

   (4) Those whose mothers are citizens of the Philippines and, upon reaching the
          age of majority, elect Philippine citizenship.

   (5) Those who are naturalized in accordance with law.

    Section 2. Philippine citizenship may be lost or reacquired in the manner

          provided by law.

   110. Article 163 to 182, Title VI of Executive Order No. 209, otherwise known as
          the Family Code of the Philippines, which took effect on 4 August 1988.

   111. Statistics from the PSA or its predecessor agencies are admissible evidence.
          S e e Herrera v. COMELEC,      376 Phil. 443 (1999) and Bagabuyo v.
          COMELEC, 593 Phil. 678 (2008). In the latter case, the Court even took

          judicial notice of the figures.

   112. Transcript of Stenographic Notes, 9 February 2016, p. 40.

   113. Section 3 (y), Rule 131.

   114. 236 Phil. 307 (1987).

   115. Id. at 314-315.

   116. English translation of the Spanish original presented in the petitioner's
CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                               cdasiaonline.com          pleadings before the COMELEC and this Court. The COMELEC and private

          respondents have not disputed the accuracy and correctness of the
          translation.

   117. I Jose M. Aruego, The Framing of the Philippine Constitution 209 (1949).

   118. TSN, 16 February 2016, pp. 20-21.

   119. 117 Phil. 976 (1963).

   120. Id. at 978-979.

   121. See Section 5 of the RA No. 8552: "Location of Unknown Parent(s). — It shall
          be the duty of the Department or the child-caring agency which has
          custody of the child to exert all efforts to locate his/her unknown biological

          parent(s). If such eﬀorts fail, the child shall be registered as a foundling
          and subsequently be the subject of legal proceedings where he/she shall
          be declared abandoned." (Underlining supplied)

   122. See Exhibit "1" in SPA No. 15-001 (DC) and SPA No. 15-00 (DC).

   123. See Exhibit "2" in SPA No. 15-001 (DC) and SPA No. 15-00 (DC).

   124. Razon, Jr. v. Tagitis, 621 Phil. 536, 600 (2009) citing Pharmaceutical and
          Health Care Assoc. of the Philippines v. Duque III, 561 Phil. 386, 398

          (2007).

   125. Article 38.1, paragraphs (b) and (c) of the Statute of the International Court
          of Justice.

   126. Mijares v. Rañada, 495 Phil. 372, 395 (2005).

   127. Pharmaceutical and Health Care Assoc. of the Philippines v. Duque III, 561
          Phil. 386, 400 (2007).

   128. International School Alliance of Educators v. Quisumbing, 388 Phil. 661, 672-
          673 (2000).

   129. CONSTITUTION, Art. III, Sec. 1.

   130. Rep. of the Philippines v. Sandiganbayan, 454 Phil. 504, 545 (2003).


   131. "Everyone has the right to a nationality".

   132. See Introductory Note to the United Nations Convention on the Reduction of
          Statelessness issued by the United Nations High Commissioner on
          Refugees.

   133. Supra note 124.

   134. Supra note 126.

   135. Id. at 392; See footnote No. 55 of said case.

   136. Pharmaceutical and Health Care Assoc. of the Philippines v. Duque III, supra
          note 127.

   137. See Exhibits 38 and 39-series.

   138. Opening Statement of the Solicitor General, p. 6.

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                                cdasiaonline.com   139. First Division resolution dated 11 December 2015, upheld in toto by the

          COMELEC En Banc.

   140. 409 Phil. 633, 649 (2001).

   141. 692 Phil. 407, 420 (2012).

   142. 551 Phil. 368, 381 (2007).

   143. 531 Phil. 407, 417 (2006).

   144. Supra note 142.

   145. Supra note 140 at 646.

   146. Id. at 651.

   147. G.R. Nos. 217126-27, 10 November 2015.

   148. Id.

   149. Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 8552, Art. VI, Sec.
          33.

   150. Republic Act No. 8552 (1998), Sec. 14.

   151. Republic Act No. 8552 (1998), Sec. 15.

   152. Fernandez v. House of Representatives Electoral Tribunal, 623 Phil. 628, 660

          (2009) citing Japzon v. COMELEC, 596 Phil. 354, 370-372 (2009) further
          citing Papandayan, Jr. v. COMELEC, 430 Phil. 754, 768-770 (2002) further
          further citing Romualdez v. RTC, Br. 7, Tacloban City, G.R. No. 104960, 14
          September 1993, 226 SCRA 408, 415.

   153. Domino v. COMELEC, 369 Phil. 798, 819 (1999).

   154. TSN, 16 February 2016, p. 120.

   155. 434 Phil. 861 (2002).

   156. 596 Phil. 354 (2009).

   157. G.R. No. 209835, 22 September 2015.

   158. G.R. No. 207264, 25 June 2013, 699 SCRA 522.

   159. Supra note 155.

   160. Supra note 156.


   161. Supra note 157.

   162. Supra note 158.

   163. Republic Act No. 6768 (1989), as amended, Sec. 2 (a).

   164. Republic Act No. 6768 (1989), as amended, Sec. 1.

   165. Republic Act No. 6768 (1989), as amended, Sec. 6.

   166. Supra note 155.

CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                              cdasiaonline.com   167. Supra note 104 at 326. (Emphasis supplied)

   168. Ugdoracion, Jr. v. COMELEC, 575 Phil. 253, 265-266 (2008).

   169. In Mitra v. COMELEC, et al., [636 Phil. 753 (2010)], It was ruled that the
          residence requirement can be complied with through an incremental
          process including acquisition of business interest in the pertinent place

          and lease of feedmill building as residence.

   170. COMELEC Resolution dated 11 December 2015 in SPA No. 15-002 (DC), pp.
          4-5.

   n Note from the Publisher: Copied verbatim from the oﬃcial document. The term

         "sole" should read as "sold".




















































CD Technologies Asia, Inc. © 2021                                               cdasiaonline.com